               sensors
Article
Toward Modular and Flexible Open RAN Implementations in
6G Networks: Traffic Steering Use Case and O-RAN xApps
Marcin Dryjański 1 , Łukasz Kułacz 1,2                    and Adrian Kliks 1,2, *

                                          1   Rimedo Labs, 61-131 Poznań, Poland; marcin.dryjanski@rimedolabs.com (M.D.);
                                              lukasz.kulacz@put.poznan.pl or lukasz.kulacz@rimedolabs.com (Ł.K.)
                                          2   Institute of Radiocommunications, Poznan University of Technology, 61-131 Poznań, Poland
                                          *   Correspondence: adrian.kliks@put.poznan.pl or adrian.kliks@rimedolabs.com


                                          Abstract: The development of cellular wireless systems has entered the phase when 5G networks are
                                          being deployed and the foundations of 6G solutions are being identified. However, in parallel to
                                          this, another technological breakthrough is observed, as the concept of open radio access networks is
                                          coming into play. Together with advancing network virtualization and programmability, this may
                                          reshape the way the functionalities and services related to radio access are designed, leading to
                                          modular and flexible implementations. This paper overviews the idea of open radio access networks
                                          and presents ongoing O-RAN Alliance standardization activities in this context. The whole analysis
                                          is supported by a study of the traffic steering use case implemented in a modular way, following the
                                          open networking approach.


                                Keywords: open RAN; xAPP development; traffic steering; 5G/6G
         

Citation: Dryjański, M.; Kułacz, Ł.;
Kliks, A. Toward Modular and
Flexible Open RAN Implementations         1. Introduction
in 6G Networks: Traffic Steering Use            The current world and national economic development will be significantly driven
Case and O-RAN xApps. Sensors             by the practical and wide-scale deployments of 5G cellular networks. Various use cases
2021, 21, 8173. https://doi.org/
                                          have been identified and extensively investigated over the last decade, where 5G solu-
10.3390/s21248173
                                          tions should incentivize investors in various vertical industry sectors to strengthen their
                                          involvement. At the same time, the scientific community all over the world discusses the
Academic Editor: Omprakash
                                          requirements and challenges for the next technological leap in the wireless communication
Kaiwartya
                                          domain, i.e., the sixth generation of cellular networks [1,2]. One of the key aspects in this
                                          context is the increasing role of artificial intelligence tools which are considered for 5G and
Received: 20 October 2021
Accepted: 1 December 2021
                                          also for future 6G networks [3,4].
Published: 7 December 2021
                                                In parallel to this development process, another significant transition is happening in
                                          the wireless communication domain that is not part of the main 5G ecosystem [5]. As this
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                          will affect the functioning of cellular networks from the mobile network operators’ (MNOs)
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                          and infrastructure vendors’ perspective, it will have a very limited influence on the end
published maps and institutional affil-   user. Namely, the architecture of the Radio Access Network (RAN) is rapidly evolving
iations.                                  from a solid, black-box approach (also known as silo) towards guaranteeing a high level
                                          of openness. In the former case, the hardware manufacturers are typically delivering
                                          harmonized and integrated solutions to MNOs, leaving them rather limited possibilities of
                                          influencing the internals beyond a typical configuration. In contrast, the so-called Open
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                                          RAN approach benefits from RAN virtualization and its structural openness [5,6]. Thus,
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          the underlying hardware can be abstracted, allowing for easy and flexible modification
This article is an open access article
                                          of the software installed on it. Please note that this process is one of the consequences
distributed under the terms and           of overall network virtualization, of moving various functionalities to the cloud or the
conditions of the Creative Commons        edge [7]. Next, the openness of intra-RAN interfaces creates opportunities for flexible
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     software delivery by various telecom vendors. Moreover, the software running on open
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          RAN-supported hardware can be structured in a specific way, where selected algorithms
4.0/).                                    (needed for operating the wireless networks) will be treated as separate applications,



Sensors 2021, 21, 8173. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21248173                                                   https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2021, 21, 8173                                                                                           2 of 14




                         managed by a dedicated controller. Following the O-RAN Alliance (here referred to as O-
                         RAN in contrast to Open RAN) specifications, such applications are called xApps or rApps,
                         depending on their time scale of operations [8]. An intelligent controller is often considered
                         a sophisticated entity, equipped with artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML)
                         capabilities. Thus, the MNOs, or in a wider scope service providers (SP) may modify,
                         update, replace or extend selected functions within the RAN protocol stack whenever it
                         is needed.
                              Such a programmable and highly modular structure of the RAN architecture will
                         have a significant impact not only on the structure of the future wireless networking
                         market, but also on the prospective research and development process in this domain.
                         The presence of AI/ML-equipped modules, as well as independence from the underlying
                         hardware and the necessity of xApp modularity and flexibility, entails the need to redefine
                         the ways new algorithms are invented [9,10]. Let us just mention that it could be necessary
                         to consider the presence of specific kinds of application interfaces (and in consequence,
                         access to specific types of data) between the controller and other applications. Furthermore,
                         a high level of RAN virtualization in the Open RAN concept opens new directions of
                         RAN implementation, which may now be moved to the cloud. This option may be of
                         interest to all MNOs and SPs in the context of deployment of private mobile networks,
                         due to the reduction in the time-to-market and installation costs. Finally, Open RAN
                         is brought forward as one of the important elements in the mobile systems evolution
                         towards the 6G era [11,12]. Seeing the practical realization of the Open RAN concept as
                         a driver in the wireless communication domain, in this paper, we overview the recent
                         achievements in this context. We start with the presentation of RAN transformation from
                         the classic, highly centralized manner to the Open RAN idea. Next, we present the current,
                         yet selected, standardization activities in the O-RAN area, and then we concentrate on
                         the xApp development process. In that spirit, the key contribution of this paper is the
                         description of the traffic steering xApp, which has been implemented in a hierarchical
                         and modular manner [13]. The presented results highlight the benefits of such a modular
                         approach by showing how the AI/ML tools may be used for intelligent management of the
                         xApp functioning, and in consequence, for improving system performance.

                         2. Open RAN Concept
                               The transformation from the legacy RAN towards the Open RAN can be described in
                         phases. In the first generations of cellular networks, the radio access part was realized in
                         the form of black-box hardware delivered by a single selected vendor. With the evolution
                         of the network architecture, cloud-based approaches have increased their importance.
                         Mainly, the so-called Cloud RAN appeared to be an important element of the 4G network
                         architecture. Evolving further towards Open RAN (and more specifically, O-RAN), the
                         base station (BS) has been split into the centralized unit (CU), distributed unit (DU), and
                         remote unit (RU). Those can be developed by different vendors due to the open interfaces
                         between them, including F1, E1, and Open Fronthaul (see Figure 1). In addition to that, the
                         RAN Intelligent Controller (RIC), is separated from the processing units and allows us to
                         gather radio resource management (RRM) and self-organizing networks (SON) functions,
                         which control the radio resources and network. In the O-RAN concept, this is where the
                         intelligence sits, employing AI models for radio network automation.

                         2.1. O-RAN
                               In O-RAN, all BS parts mentioned above get the “O-” prefix, meaning that they are
                         adapted to the O-RAN Alliance definition and architecture (see Figure 1). Those entities
                         are connected to RIC via the E2-interface and are called “E2 Nodes”. Furthermore, RIC is
                         split into “near-Real Time RIC” (near-RT RIC) and “Non-Real Time RIC” (Non-RT RIC).
                         The latter one sits at the service and management orchestration system (SMO). This split
                         allows a hierarchization of RRM, differentiating algorithm operations on the timescale of
                         operation [8].
Sensors 2021, 21, 8173                                                                                                          3 of 14
 Sensors 2021, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                            3 of 14




                                  Figure1.1.O-RAN
                                 Figure     O-RANArchitecture.
                                                  Architecture.

                                       The key characteristics of the O-RAN concept are:
                                  2.1. O-RAN
                                 •     disaggregation
                                         In O-RAN, all BS   of BS  into
                                                                parts   granular functions
                                                                      mentioned    above get (O-CU/O-DU/O-RU),
                                                                                              the “O-” prefix, meaning decoupling  of
                                                                                                                         that they are
                                       software    from    hardware,   and  opening  up  internal BS interfaces;
                                  adapted to the O-RAN Alliance definition and architecture (see Figure 1). Those entities
                                 •are connected
                                       the above encourages        theE2-interface
                                                      to RIC via the   developmentand of an
                                                                                         areopen  and
                                                                                             called   enlarged
                                                                                                    “E2 Nodes”.telco  ecosystemRIC
                                                                                                                  Furthermore,   withis
                                  splitdifferent   vendors,Time
                                         into “near-Real       suchRIC”
                                                                     as O-CU   vendors,
                                                                           (near-RT  RIC)RIC
                                                                                           andvendors, algorithm/xApp
                                                                                                “Non-Real                 developers,
                                                                                                           Time RIC” (Non-RT     RIC).
                                  The and    system
                                        latter  one sitsintegrators;
                                                           at the service and management orchestration system (SMO). This split
                                 •allows
                                       intelligent     and holistic
                                            a hierarchization        management
                                                                  of RRM,           enabledalgorithm
                                                                            differentiating  by RIC, where   the system
                                                                                                       operations  on theintelligence
                                                                                                                          timescale of
                                       is  embedded
                                  operation [8].          within  the  O-RAN    architecture  using AI  models   and RRM functions,
                                       like
                                         TheTraffic     Steering (TS),
                                               key characteristics    ofInterference  Management
                                                                         the O-RAN concept     are: (IM), QoS Management, Load
                                       Balancing, etc.
                                  •      disaggregation of BS into granular functions (O-CU/O-DU/O-RU), decoupling of
                                 2.2. RANsoftware    fromController
                                              Intelligent   hardware,(RIC)
                                                                        and opening up internal BS interfaces;
                                  •      the above encourages the development of an open and enlarged telco ecosystem with
                                       RIC is one of the key elements in the O-RAN architecture. It is a platform for which,
                                         different vendors, such as O-CU vendors, RIC vendors, algorithm/xApp developers,
                                 e.g., xApp software vendors can provide RRM/SON algorithms to allow the optimization
                                         and system integrators;
                                 of radio resource usage for specific applications. The motivation for RIC is to provide
                                  •      intelligent and holistic management enabled by RIC, where the system intelligence
                                 controllability to RAN in order to optimize and improve system performance, taking
                                         is embedded within the O-RAN architecture using AI models and RRM functions,
                                 into account the current state of mobile systems. The complexity of those is increased
                                 due tolike    Trafficdensification,
                                           network       Steering (TS),newInterference Management
                                                                             spectrum bands,          (IM), QoS Management,
                                                                                               multi-radio-access                Load
                                                                                                                   technology (RAT),
                                         Balancing, etc. Network (HetNet) scenarios brought on by 5G. Therefore, the task to
                                 and Heterogeneous
                                 optimally allocate radio resources, manage handovers or interference, balance the load
                                  2.2. RANmultiple
                                 between     Intelligentcells
                                                          Controller (RIC) is not trivial [13,14]. With the use of RIC, RRM is
                                                              and carriers
                                        RIC isfrom
                                 decoupled      one of  the
                                                      the RANkey stack
                                                                 elements
                                                                        andinenables
                                                                               the O-RAN     architecture. It is
                                                                                       the implementation      ofavarious
                                                                                                                   platform  for which,
                                                                                                                           algorithms
                                  e.g., xApp software
                                 collectively  utilizingvendors
                                                           a common canset
                                                                         provide  RRM/SON
                                                                            of data.           algorithms
                                                                                      This approach         to allow
                                                                                                       provides       the optimization
                                                                                                                   holistic control by
                                  of radio
                                 RRM        resource
                                         across        usage for specific
                                                 all technologies,         applications.
                                                                     spectrum              The motivation
                                                                                 bands, cells,  and antenna forports.
                                                                                                                 RIC is An
                                                                                                                        to provide con-
                                                                                                                            additional
                                  trollability to  RAN    in  order  to optimize   and   improve   system  performance,
                                 benefit of using this concept is the per-use-case-based management of RAN. According       taking into
                                  account
                                 to         the current
                                    it, applying          state of control
                                                   policy-based    mobile allows
                                                                            systems.forThe  complexity of those
                                                                                        performance-based          is increased
                                                                                                                decisions        duetoto
                                                                                                                           adjusted
                                  network
                                 specific    densification, new spectrum bands, multi-radio-access technology (RAT), and
                                           applications.
                          timally allocate radio resources, manage handovers or interference, balance the load be-
                          tween multiple cells and carriers is not trivial [13,14]. With the use of RIC, RRM is decou-
                          pled from the RAN stack and enables the implementation of various algorithms collec-
                          tively utilizing a common set of data. This approach provides holistic control by RRM
Sensors 2021, 21, 8173    across all technologies, spectrum bands, cells, and antenna ports. An additional benefit              4 of 14of
                          using this concept is the per-use-case-based management of RAN. According to it, apply-
                          ing policy-based control allows for performance-based decisions adjusted to specific ap-
                          plications.
                              Figure
                                Figure2 2shows
                                           shows the details
                                                   the        of of
                                                         details thetheRICRIC split intointo
                                                                                 split   near-RT   RIC RIC
                                                                                              near-RT    and and
                                                                                                              non-RT    RIC. RIC.
                                                                                                                    non-RT    The for-
                                                                                                                                    The
                         mer  is responsible   for handling   the   near-RT     RRM/SON        functions  (on
                          former is responsible for handling the near-RT RRM/SON functions (on a timescale be- a timescale   between
                         >10  ms and
                          tween         <1 s),
                                   >10 ms   andsuch   as such
                                                  <1 s),  Mobility     Management,
                                                               as Mobility                IM, etc.IM,
                                                                                 Management,        Theetc.
                                                                                                          latter
                                                                                                             Thehandles     the high-
                                                                                                                   latter handles    the
                         level/orchestration
                          high-level/orchestration functions and provides policies to near-RT RIC over theinterface.
                                                 functions  and   provides      policies   to near-RT   RIC  over   the A1    A1 inter-
                         Note
                          face.that
                                 Notethe real-time
                                       that         RRM is
                                            the real-time     still is
                                                            RRM      there,  embedded
                                                                       still there,         in O-DU
                                                                                     embedded         (e.g., MAC
                                                                                                  in O-DU            scheduler).
                                                                                                             (e.g., MAC           The
                                                                                                                           scheduler).
                         scheduler can be controlled by near-RT RIC only via general policies. To summarize, there
                          The scheduler can be controlled by near-RT RIC only via general policies. To summarize,
                         are three control loops, RT (<10 ms) handled by O-DU, near RT (>10 ms, <1 s) handled
                          there are three control loops, RT (<10 ms) handled by O-DU, near RT (>10 ms, <1 s) han-
                         by near-RT RIC, and Non-RT (>1 s) handled by non-RT RIC. It is a hierarchical design,
                          dled by near-RT RIC, and Non-RT (>1 s) handled by non-RT RIC. It is a hierarchical de-
                         which allows for the separation of resource handling concerns [11]. Near-RT RIC, being re-
                          sign, which allows for the separation of resource handling concerns [11]. Near-RT RIC,
                         sponsible for RAN control and optimization, incorporates RRM/SON algorithms (through
                          being responsible for RAN control and optimization, incorporates RRM/SON algorithms
                         xApps) and bases its operation on UE- and cell-specific metrics.
                          (through xApps) and bases its operation on UE- and cell-specific metrics.




                          Figure2.2.RAN
                         Figure      RANIntelligent
                                         IntelligentController:
                                                     Controller:non-RT
                                                                 non-RTRIC
                                                                        RICand
                                                                            andnear-RT
                                                                                near-RTRIC.
                                                                                        RIC.

                                Asper
                               As  per[15],
                                       [15],and
                                              andasasshown
                                                       shownininFigure
                                                                  Figure2,2,near-RT
                                                                             near-RTRIC:
                                                                                      RIC:
                         ••     providesa database
                               provides   a database     storing
                                                      storing the the configurations
                                                                  configurations        related
                                                                                   related to E2 to E2 nodes,
                                                                                                 nodes,         cells, bearers,
                                                                                                        cells, bearers, flows,
                                flows,
                               UEs, andUEs,  and mappings
                                        mappings      betweenbetween
                                                                them; them;
                         ••     providesML
                               provides   MLtools
                                               toolsthat
                                                      thatsupport
                                                           supportdata
                                                                     datapipelining;
                                                                           pipelining;
                         ••     providesthe
                               provides   themessaging
                                                messaginginfrastructure
                                                              infrastructuretotosupport
                                                                                  supportinformation
                                                                                            informationexchange
                                                                                                          exchangebetween
                                                                                                                      between
                                xAppsand
                               xApps   andthethenear-RT
                                                 near-RTRIC RICframework;
                                                                 framework;
                         •     provides logging, tracing, and metrics collection from the near-RT RIC framework
                               and xApps to SMO;
                         •     provides security functions for xApps;
                         •     supports the conflict resolution function to resolve the potential overlaps that may be
                               caused by various xApps;
                         •     supports A1 interface used to provide policies and ML model management to near-RT
                               RIC and obtain feedback from its operation using those policies and models.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8173                                                                                           5 of 14




                         •    supports E2 interface used to send control/policy messages down to E2 Nodes for
                              resource allocation/prioritization and obtain fine-grained UE/RAN statistics from
                              E2 Nodes.

                         3. RIC and xApps—Towards a CI/CD Approach in RAN Design
                               Progressive RAN programmability and openness of its architecture, including com-
                         munication interfaces, move the RAN implementation close to the currently popular trends
                         in efficient code delivery. In particular, the well-known and widely applied concept of con-
                         tinuous integration, continuous delivery (CI/CD) has gained great attention in advanced
                         software development in recent years. This approach assumes that instead of providing
                         new updates of the product in the form of new big releases (or significantly large pack-
                         ages), the final product is upgraded continuously through small patches, while keeping
                         it operational all the time. In turn, the whole programming process has to be specifically
                         designed towards high automation of testing and reliability of code integration, as well as
                         towards high modularity. In addition to virtualization, where the underlying hardware is
                         abstracted, software containerization has recently become highly popular, complementary
                         to the creation of virtual machines. Thus, up-to-date software providers may operate taking
                         profits from both hardware abstraction, and the ability to create isolated spaces within the
                         same operating system for advanced automation and short-time operations. In view of
                         this, the practical realization of the RAN environment may become more programmable,
                         virtualized, and “containerized”.
                               With this in mind, the Open RAN providers may in turn benefit from modular
                         updating of selected RAN functions, and in general, from continuous and systematic code
                         improvements. The up-to-date solutions in computer science, jointly with the openness
                         and modularity of Open RAN architecture and interfaces, create the basis for a new
                         RAN development paradigm. In particular, it is expected that instead of being part
                         of the black box, the particular functionalities of RAN may be modularized, separated,
                         and may be delivered and upgraded by various software providers. Such functions
                         include, e.g., TS, admission control (see example in [16]), IM, and user paring into layers in
                         massive MIMO networks. As the RRM algorithms operate—to some extent—as separate
                         entities that communicate utilizing open, yet precisely defined, interfaces, they can be
                         conceptually easily:
                         •    uninstalled—if the functionality in the current form is no longer needed, e.g., when
                              instead of RRM realized per single BS, the O-RAN Service Provider (OSP) decides to
                              apply an advanced coordinated solution;
                         •    upgraded—when a new version of the module has been released, e.g., if the current
                              vendor of the IM module equips it with new functionalities adjusted for a larger
                              number of antennas installed on the mast;
                         •    replaced—when an existing piece of software is removed and a new one delivered by
                              other software vendors is installed;
                         •    added—when the OSP decides to apply or test a new functionality, e.g., OSP wants to test
                              new non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) schemes offered by some research entity.
                              All of the above-mentioned operations may be performed continuously and to some
                         extent automatically. Thus, the Open RAN concept can modify the way the RAN software
                         is delivered to and managed by the OSP—in the prospective free-market model, dedicated
                         RAN functionalities (i.e., xApps) may be delivered by competing companies. Such an
                         approach has the potential to reduce the price of RAN and improve the end-to-end quality
                         as an effect of competitiveness, inherent to a free market.
                              Regarding AI modeling in O-RAN design, as per [17], ML training takes place in SMO
                         or directly in non-RT RIC, while ML inference can be deployed in non-RT RIC or near-RT
                         RIC where ML model updates and enrichment information are transferred from non-RT
                         RIC to near-RT RIC via A1 interface. Examples of the AI/ML application within RIC
                         include quality of experience (QoE) prediction, cell load prediction, prediction/detection
                         of handover anomalies, and latency prediction. The example types of AI/ML algorithms
Sensors 2021, 21, 8173                                                                                            6 of 14




                         for those applications include various versions of supervised learning, e.g., deep neural
                         networks (DNN).
                               However, despite the evident advantages of Open RAN, various challenges have
                         to be faced. First, this concept may be vulnerable to security threats, as the possibility
                         of continuous and seamless updates of modules opens doors to various malicious activ-
                         ities. Next, the whole design process of RAN processing has to be redefined in such a
                         way that Open RAN-compliant software will achieve similar or better results than the
                         existing solutions, while allowing for software modularity and flexibility and openness
                         of interfaces. Moreover, it is possible to apply AI tools to improve the management of
                         installed applications. Let us consider the example of operation within near-RT RIC, where
                         the conformance to standards and internal integrity has to be decided. xApp subscription
                         management is required to identify and distribute the awareness of a new xApp being
                         onboarded, and to allow data distribution among all xApps that subscribe to the data col-
                         lection. Moreover, a conflict mitigation function is needed to resolve overlapping requests
                         from xApps. For example, there may be a mobility load balancing (MLB) function working
                         along with mobility robustness optimization (MRO). They both have a similar impact on
                         user behavior. MLB may request the user to be moved from one cell to another due to high
                         traffic load, while MRO at the same time may induce moving the user back as the handover
                         boundary changes due to a high handover failure rate in the other cell. In such a case,
                         the individual user will be subject to a “ping-pong” effect between the two cells. Thus,
                         the conflict mitigation function’s job is to align the “to-be-invoked” actions to avoid such
                         undesired behavior. This function judges what impact the potential action may have on the
                         network if being executed in the E2-Node. One important note here is that an individual
                         xApp directly controls a particular functionality (e.g., handover function) at the RAN nodes
                         (O-CUs or O-DUs) and requests certain actions to be made in those.
                               Of course, these three aspects (security, efficiency, and advanced AI-based manage-
                         ment) are not exhaustive, as many other challenges of Open RAN may be identified. In the
                         following chapter, however, we intentionally concentrate on the modularity, flexibility, and
                         efficiency of the delivered function of traffic steering.

                         4. Traffic Steering Use Case Analysis
                               The O-RAN Alliance specifies the use cases (UC) to be addressed by xApps, rApps
                         and RIC 21, and defines the policies by which the algorithms designed to support the use
                         cases can be controlled. The use cases are prioritized as per MNOs’ requirements. One
                         such typical example is TS, the objective of which is to steer the user traffic through a
                         specific cell, taking into account available schemes (such as handover, dual connectivity,
                         carrier aggregation, license-assisted access, HetNet) and resources (such as multi-RAT,
                         licensed and unlicensed carriers, etc.). Optimal traffic steering has been a challenge in
                         wireless networks for many years, and numerous solutions have been proposed in the rich
                         literature, addressing its various aspects [18–21]. As per [22], the challenge to be addressed
                         by UC is that the typical TS schemes use radio conditions of a cell by treating all users in
                         the same way and are limited to adjusting cell priorities and cell reselection/handover
                         thresholds. The O-RAN Alliance aims at addressing the TS UC by customizing UE-centric
                         strategies and proactive optimization by predicting network conditions and allowing
                         MNOs to specify different objectives for traffic management depending on the scenario,
                         and flexibly configure optimization policies. In this context, RIC is to control the adaptation
                         of diverse scenarios and objectives and control TS strategies through AI/ML learning from
                         user/network data.
                               Let us investigate a wireless network with open interfaces through which it is possible
                         to implement network functionality externally. The goal of the conducted simulations and
                         analyses is to show the possibility of applying the concept of Open RAN, where individual
                         elements of RAN are replaced to optimize the operation of the entire network.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8173                                                                                            7 of 14




                         4.1. Simulation Setup
                              We consider a typical HetNet deployed, consisting of one high-power macro-BS and
                         four small cells. To promote access to small cells, OSP can apply a dedicated power offset
                         (achieving cell range extension). All cells may operate in two separated bands, i.e., a
                         carrier frequency of 800 MHz with 5 MHz channel bandwidth, and 2 GHz with 10 MHz
                         bandwidth. Only downlink (DL) transmission is considered. From the point of view of
                         MNO, there is a cost c associated with the selection of lower and higher frequency bands,
                         which reflect various kinds of loads for MNO, such as energy consumption cost, prices
                         for a license, etc. Over the considered area, two types of users are randomly deployed
                         with uniform distribution. A total of 80% are voice users (whose traffic is characterized by
                         the constant and relatively low bit rate of ~250 kbps), and the rest are MBB users (with a
                         constant and high bit rate of ~3 Mbps). The user is assumed to be in an outage when its
                         achieved bit rate is below the required one. Let us also mention that our implementation is
                         generic, i.e., we intentionally did not apply any of the existing platforms for RIC simulation.
                         Our goal is to illustrate the benefits of xApp modularity supported by defined interfaces
                         and the independence of the RIC platform.

                         4.2. xApp Implementation
                              The goal of this work was to make the TS functionality modular, changeable, controlled
                         by an AI engine, and accessible by other external applications and by human administrators,
                         as shown in Figure 3. We focused on the TS case, where OSP can apply various functioning
                         policies, which are applied to independent xApps and realized in near-RT RIC. First,
                         OSP may specify the rules of how the available two frequency bands should be utilized—
                         this functionality is delivered to OSP in the form of xApp1. Second, OSP may define
                         the preferences of usage of either the macro base station or the small cells (functionality
                         delivered by xApp2). Finally, the priorities between the two types of users may be applied
                         while offering them wireless services (defined within xApp3). Within each xApp, all
                         necessary computations are performed to effectively apply the policies selected by OSP.
                              In addition to that, non-RT RIC is equipped with an ML model to properly adjust
                         policies to achieve certain goals based on non-RT measurements.

                         4.2.1. xApp1 (Spectrum Management) for Frequency Band Selection
                               One of the prospective TS schemes is to offload traffic from a congested frequency
                         band to a less occupied one. When moving the operating central frequency from higher
                         bands to lower values, one may talk about the cell-zooming approach [23]. However, in
                         a broader sense, various rules may be specified depending on the currently identified
                         circumstances and needs of OSP. As we want to allow for RT modification of the policies,
                         we define them in the form of specified tuples, which may be stored in the form of simple
                         files, such as JSON or YAML, creating an application programming interface (API). Let us
                         note that the policy can specify that, for example, the small cells should “prefer” larger
                         bandwidths over costs or expected range, and the macro-cell should minimize its range.
                         The word “prefer” should be treated loosely, allowing for various implementations by
                         different applications. In the experiment, two policy options have been defined:
                         •    CHEAP—where each cell should use the band with the lowest cost c;
                         •    PERFORMANCE—where macro-cells should prefer a band with a higher range, and
                              small cells should prefer a band with greater bandwidth.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8173                                                                                                                               8 of 14
               Sensors 2021, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                    8 of 14




                    Figure 3. Mapping of xApps installations to RICs (xApp1—Spectrum Management, xApp2—Cell Assignment, xApp3—
      Figure 3. Mapping
                 Resource of xApps installations to RICs (xApp1—Spectrum Management, xApp2—Cell Assignment, xApp3—
                          Allocation).
      Resource Allocation).
                                                     In addition to that, non-RT RIC is equipped with an ML model to properly adjust
                                                policies to achieve certain goals based on non-RT measurements.
                                        4.2.2. xApp2 (Cell Assignment) for User Assignment to BS
                                             Analogously,       one may
                                              4.2.1. xApp1 (Spectrum      specify the
                                                                        Management) forpolicies
                                                                                        Frequencyfor   user
                                                                                                    Band       assignment to BS. The set of rules,
                                                                                                           Selection
                                        in this case,
                                                    One specifies    the “preference”
                                                         of the prospective TS schemes is of  cell classes
                                                                                          to offload           for adifferent
                                                                                                     traffic from    congested user  classes. As an
                                                                                                                               frequency
                                              bandthe
                                        example,     to apolicy
                                                          less occupied one. When
                                                                 can specify  thatmoving   the operating
                                                                                   small cells    shouldcentral
                                                                                                           “prefer”frequency from higher
                                                                                                                       MBB users    over voice users,
                                              bands to lower values, one may talk about the cell-zooming approach [23]. However, in a
                                        and macro-cells      should “prefer” voice users over MBB users. In this work, the following
                                              broader sense, various rules may be specified depending on the currently identified cir-
                                        policies were    considered:
                                              cumstances and needs of OSP. As we want to allow for RT modification of the policies,
                                        •       we define them in the form
                                               DEFAULT—where             usersof are
                                                                                  specified tuples,to
                                                                                       assigned     which
                                                                                                       cellsmay be stored
                                                                                                             based        in the form received
                                                                                                                     on strongest     of simple power;
                                        •       files, such as JSON or YAML,MBB
                                               OFFLOADING—where                  creating  an application
                                                                                        users   should be programming
                                                                                                             preferredinterface
                                                                                                                          in small(API).
                                                                                                                                     cellsLet
                                                                                                                                           andus voice users
                                                note that the policy can specify that, for example, the small cells should “prefer” larger
                                               should     be preferred in macro-cells;
                                                bandwidths over costs or expected range, and the macro-cell should minimize its range.
                                        •      SEPARATING—where
                                                The word “prefer” should be    MBB      users
                                                                                   treated     should
                                                                                           loosely,      be assigned
                                                                                                    allowing  for variousonly   to small cells,
                                                                                                                           implementations    by and voice
                                               users    should
                                                different        be assigned
                                                           applications.           only to macro-cells.
                                                                         In the experiment,   two policy options have been defined:
                                                •    CHEAP—where each cell should use the band with the lowest cost c;
                                        4.2.3. •xApp3 (Resource Allocation)
                                                   PERFORMANCE—where        for Resource
                                                                       macro-cells          Scheduling
                                                                                   should prefer a band with a higher range, and
                                                     small cells should prefer a band with greater bandwidth.
                                             Finally, the last xApp is responsible for the definition of the prospective resource
                                        allocation strategy per BS. The policies in this case specify the “preference” of users of
                                        a specific class in terms of resource allocation. As an example, the policy can specify
                                        that MBB users will have more bandwidth allocated than voice users. Four policies have
                                        been identified:
                                        •      EQUAL—where all users have an equal amount of bandwidth allocated;
                                        •      PREFER_VOICE—where voice users have a larger bandwidth allocated (proportionally);
                                        •      PREFER_MBB—where MBB users have a larger bandwidth allocated (proportionally);
                                        •      RESERVE—where a specific user class has a reserved portion of bandwidth that can
                                               be used only by users of this class.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8173                                                                                            9 of 14




                              To be able to measure the performance of the system, the default setup of the network
                         has been defined, where the cheapest frequency band is selected, the users are assigned
                         to the cell based on received signal power, and the radio resources are allocated equally
                         among the users.

                         4.3. System Training
                              Once the applications have been defined and implemented, we verified their function-
                         ing in all configurations. Thus, the performance of each xApp has been tested in terms of
                         observed rate and outage probability, averaged over numerous user location deployments.
                         Moreover, various joint configurations have been tested, e.g., simultaneous installation of
                         xApp1 and xApp2. The achieved results have been presented and stored in the form of
                         complementary cumulative distribution functions (CCDF). Selected results are also shown
                         in Figure 3 for illustrative purposes only. By analyzing each particular plot, one can observe
                         that while in some situations it is worth applying a certain policy, it is not that beneficial
                         in other cases. Thus, to select the most promising policy, either the system administrator
                         should analyze the curves and decide on the best strategy or let AI tools do it based on
                         predefined criteria. In our tests, we have applied a simple ML tool (sitting at the non-RT
                         RIC)—logistic regression, which allows for the selection of the policy that reduces outage
                         in the system. Figure 3 presents the trained models, or more precisely, achieved CCDFs,
                         which are available in non-RT RIC and influence the policy choice by near-RT RIC. Having
                         such a system, we have performed experiments proving the benefits of xApp modularity,
                         as discussed in the next section.

                         4.4. Simulation Results
                                In our experiments, we did not concentrate on the performance of an individual
                         xApp, but rather we focused on the modularity and flexibility of the whole O-RAN
                         application. Thus, we specified three experimentation scenarios, for which we showed
                         selected performance metrics (mean bitrate for MBB and Voice users and outage probability)
                         as a function of time for a random but fixed deployment of users. These scenarios have
                         been considered to observe the benefits of temporal installation or de-installation of certain
                         xApps, or at least modification of their operating policies (see Figure 4). Please notice that
                         the reference setup to each scenario is the one where specific TS, spectrum management,
                         and cell assignment algorithm is applied, and it is not subject to any changes.
                                Scenario 1: We start with the default, reference setup with no active xApp; at the 50 s
                         time stamp, xApp1 is started, with the default CHEAP policy (analogous to the default
                         setup), and thus no changes are observed; at 100 s, the policy changes to PERFORMANCE,
                         leading to some mean bitrate increase (for both MBB and Voice users) but at the expense of
                         some outage degradation; at 150 s, the system returns to the prior setup. As both the policy
                         within xApp1, as well as the xApp1 itself can be modified (or even replaced, uninstalled,
                         etc.), this scenario illustrates the benefits of xApp modularity and flexibility. OSP will have
                         the opportunity to install or modify the selected features of its system even for a short time
                         and observe the achieved results. Such performance measurements can also be analyzed
                         by the AI engine to adjust the software to an instantaneous network change.
                                Scenario 2: Here, we extend the previous case to the situation where two separate
                         xApps are installed, we observe interactions between them and react accordingly; thus,
                         at 50 s, xApp3 starts preferring MBB users over voice users, thus the bitrate of MBB uses
                         increases, and for Voice users, it decreases, leading at the same time to an improvement of
                         outage probability; at 100 s, xApp1 chooses PERFORMANCE, which in this network state
                         (i.e., location of users, their requests for resources) causes performance degradation; thus,
                         the system selects again the CHEAP strategies at 150 s. This scheme shows the benefits
                         of flexibility available to OSP—it can select the most suitable setup of the installed xApps
                         and react immediately when any performance deterioration is observed. Please note that
                         it is also possible to change or apply new policies within each xApp in order to adjust
                         them to the current OSP needs. Such flexibility may not be easily available in a static,
 Sensors 2021, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                    10 of 14


Sensors 2021, 21, 8173                                                                                                  10 of 14
                                  performance metrics (mean bitrate for MBB and Voice users and outage probability) as a
                                  function of time for a random but fixed deployment of users. These scenarios have been
                                  considered to observe the benefits of temporal installation or de-installation of certain
                                 non-O-RAN scheme. This scheme also shows the prospective challenge that OSP has to
                                  xApps, or at least modification of their operating policies (see Figure 4). Please notice that
                                 face, i.e., maintaining the conformance of installed applications. Thus, the application of
                                  the reference setup to each scenario is the one where specific TS, spectrum management,
                                 AI tools may be necessary.
                                  and cell assignment algorithm is applied, and it is not subject to any changes.




                                  Figure4.4.Achieved
                                 Figure      Achievedresults
                                                      resultsfor
                                                              forthree
                                                                  threeconsidered
                                                                        consideredexperimentation
                                                                                   experimentationschemes.
                                                                                                    schemes.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8173                                                                                            11 of 14




                               Scenario 3: This is the most complicated scheme in our investigation. We start with
                         all considered xApps running, and xApp1 works in the PERFORMANCE mode. Next,
                         at 50 s, xApp starts preferring MBB users (resulting in MBB bitrate increase at no other
                         cost), and at 100 s xApp2 selects the OFFLOADING policy (which is associated with some
                         additional cost for OSP, some deterioration of Voice bitrate but significant gain in outage
                         probability), whereas at 150 s, xApp1 returns to the CHEAP mode. One can observe that
                         by testing these variants, at the end, OSP can find the best setup. Such an approach offers
                         OSP the possibility to dynamically adjust the system setup to the changing network state.
                         As the immediate installation and modification of selected features are not easily available
                         in a black-boxed approach, the modularity and flexibility can then be treated as a good
                         performance improvement opportunity.

                         5. Discussion
                              In this paper, we provided an overview of the O-RAN concept with particular empha-
                         sis on the RIC platform and RRM algorithm implementation and interaction in the form
                         of xApps, along with ML-equipped modules. Such a programmable and highly modular
                         RAN structure has a significant impact on future wireless network implementation. Using
                         the O-RAN concept offers the following benefits:
                         •    adding intelligence to network with external entities (such as xApps or RIC);
                         •    controlling RAN behavior by declarative policies;
                         •    combination of various applications to realize certain objectives/strategies;
                         •    a hierarchical and modular approach to resource management;
                         •    flexibility and modularity of RAN;
                         •    defining applications/xApps per use case basis.
                              Looking into the interactions between the example xApps developed in the due time
                         of this work, namely Cell Assignment, Spectrum Management, and Resource Allocation,
                         the following holds:
                         •    This approach increases the flexibility of controlling radio resources within the whole
                              Traffic Steering use case, by playing with the radio resources on three levels;
                         •    Combining the policies for the different xApps offers a possibility to optimize the
                              usage of radio resources according to the selected strategy;
                         •    Hierarchization allows for the separation of the concerns and focusing on a specific item;
                         •    Modularization allows for expanding the framework with new xApps in a plug-and-
                              play manner, which does not change the overall structure.
                              Summarizing the achieved results, one can observe that the possibility of installing/
                         uninstalling the xApp jointly with the tailored method for selecting the best policy creates
                         promising ways for OSP to improve the network performance depending on its (current)
                         needs. The software modularity allows for fast adjustments of network functioning, thus
                         leading to efficiency increase and adaptation to a particular situation or scenario.
                              In this paper, the authors provide a discussion on the case where all xApps operate for
                         the purpose of a single use case. This, of course, can be different in real-life networks, where
                         there are multiple use cases to be served at the same time, e.g., interference management
                         together with massive MIMO and QoE optimization with network slicing resource assur-
                         ance to multiple slices, resulting in having multiple different xApps running in parallel.
                         A different situation could also arise when various xApps for the same functionality are
                         used (e.g., Handover Optimization), but for different applications/scenarios (e.g., V2X,
                         HetNet, Macro, UAV), thus resulting in different algorithms, which need to be selected
                         properly for actual UEs. In such scenarios, where there are a multitude of various xApps
                         running at the same time for the same network part, the role of the RIC itself becomes even
                         more significant to avoid instability/oscillations in the network and properly select the
                         actual xApp to control the individual UE or application, as an individual xApp controls
                         the individual functionality at the E2-Node as exposed by this node.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8173                                                                                                 12 of 14




                               Regarding the machine learning application within the Open RAN design, one exam-
                         ple is the prediction of latency performed at RIC. Based on the predicted latency, near-RT
                         RIC could, e.g., request O-DU to modify the scheduling priority of an individual user or
                         primary/secondary cell reselection. One such application scenario is ultra-reliable and low
                         latency communications (URLLC), where keeping low and/or predictive latency is one of
                         the key requirements.
                               In addition to that, management of the network slices is one of the key applications of
                         Open RAN, where dynamic setting up, modification, scaling and deleting of a network
                         slice requires such an approach to virtualized and dynamically managed RAN [24].

                         Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.D., A.K. and Ł.K.; methodology, A.K.; software, Ł.K.;
                         validation, A.K. and Ł.K.; formal analysis, M.D.; investigation, M.D., A.K. and Ł.K.; resources, Ł.K.;
                         writing—original draft preparation, A.K. and Ł.K.; writing—review and editing, M.D. and A.K.;
                         visualization, A.K. and Ł.K.; supervision, A.K.; project administration, A.K.; funding acquisition,
                         A.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                         Funding: The work by Łukasz Kułacz (simulations, discussions, APC) has been funded by the
                         statutory funds for young scientists at Institute of Radiocommunications, Poznan University of
                         Technology (particularly within the project 0312/SBAD/8158 and 2021 0312/SBAD/8159).
                         Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                         Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                         Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The funders had no role in the
                         design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the
                         manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.

                         Abbreviation
                         AI           Artificial Intelligence
                         API          Application Programming Interface
                         BS           Base Station
                         CCDF         Complementary Cumulative Distribution Functions
                         CD           Continuous Delivery
                         CI           Continuous Integration
                         CP           Control Plane
                         CU           Central Unit
                         DL           Downlink
                         DNN          Deep Neural Network
                         DU           Distributed Unit
                         HetNet       Heterogeneous Network
                         IM           Interference Management
                         MAC          Medium Access Control
                         MBB          Mobile Broadband
                         Mgmt.        Management
                         MIMO         Multiple Input Multiple Output
                         ML           Machine Learning
                         MLB          Mobility Load Balancing
                         MNO          Mobile Network Operator
                         MRO          Mobility Robustness Optimization
                         NOMA         Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access
                         O-Cloud      O-RAN Cloud
                         O-CU         O-RAN Central Unit
                         O-CU-CP      O-RAN Central Unit Control Plane
                         O-CU-UP      O-RAN Central Unit User Plane
                         O-DU         O-RAN Distributed Unit
                         Open FH      Open Fronthaul
                         O-RAN        Open RAN
                         O-RU         O-RAN Radio Unit
                         OSP          O-RAN Service Provider
Sensors 2021, 21, 8173                                                                                                          13 of 14




                                  QoE           Quality of Experience
                                  QoS           Quality of Service
                                  RAN           Radio Access Network
                                  rApp          Application (algorithm) to operate within non-RT RIC
                                  RAT           Radio Access Technology
                                  RIC           RAN Intelligent Controller
                                  RRM           Radio Resource Management
                                  RT            Real-Time
                                  SMO           Service Management and Orchestration
                                  SON           Self-Organizing Networks
                                  SP            Service Provider
                                  TS            Traffic Steering
                                  UC            Use Case
                                  UE            User Equipment
                                  UP            User Plane
                                  xApp          Application (algorithm) to operate within Near-RT RIC

References
1.    Giordani, M.; Polese, M.; Mezzavilla, M.; Rangan, S.; Zorzi, M. Toward 6G Networks: Use Cases and Technologies. IEEE Commun.
      Mag. 2020, 58, 55–61. [CrossRef]
2.    Zhang, Z.; Xiao, Y.; Ma, Z.; Xiao, M.; Ding, Z.; Lei, X.; Karagiannidis, G.K.; Fan, P. 6G Wireless Networks: Vision, Requirements,
      Architecture, and Key Technologies. IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag. 2019, 14, 28–41. [CrossRef]
3.    Rekkas, V.P.; Sotiroudis, S.; Sarigiannidis, P.; Wan, S.; Karagiannidis, G.K.; Goudos, S.K. Machine Learning in Beyond 5G/6G
      Networks—State-of-the-Art and Future Trends. Electronics 2021, 10, 2786. [CrossRef]
4.    Wasilewska, M.; Kliks, A.; Bogucka, H.; Cichon, K.; Ruseckas, J.; Molis, G.; Mackute-Varoneckiene, A.; Krilavicius, T. Artificial
      Intelligence for Radio Communication Context-Awareness. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 144820–144856. [CrossRef]
5.    Singh, S.K.; Singh, R.; Kumbhani, B. The Evolution of Radio Access Network towards Open-RAN: Challenges and Opportunities.
      In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference Workshops (WCNCW), Seoul, Korea,
      25–28 May 2020; pp. 1–6.
6.    Gavrilovska, L.; Rakovic, V.; Denkovski, D. From Cloud RAN to Open RAN. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 2020, 113, 1523–1539.
      [CrossRef]
7.    Ruiz, L.; Durán, R.J.; De Miguel, I.; Khodashenas, P.S.; Pedreño-Manresa, J.-J.; Merayo, N.; Aguado, J.C.; Pavón-Marino, P.;
      Siddiqui, S.; Mata, J.; et al. A Genetic Algorithm for VNF Provisioning in NFV-Enabled Cloud/MEC RAN Architectures. Appl.
      Sci. 2018, 8, 2614. [CrossRef]
8.    O-RAN Alliance. Available online: https://www.o-ran.org/specifications (accessed on 14 May 2021).
9.    Lee, H.; Cha, J.; Kwon, D.; Jeong, M.; Park, I. Hosting AI/ML Workflows on O-RAN RIC Platform. In Proceedings of the 2020
      IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Taipei, Taiwan, 7–11 December 2020; pp. 1–6.
10.   Kumar, H.; Sapru, V.; Jaisawal, S.K. O-RAN based proactive ANR optimization. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Globecom
      Workshops (GC Wkshps), Taipei, Taiwan, 7–11 December 2020.
11.   Niknam, S.; Roy, A.; Dhillon, H.S.; Singh, S.; Banerji, R.; Reed, J.H.; Saxena, N.; Yoon, S. Intelligent O-RAN for beyond 5G
      and 6G wireless networks. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2005.08374. Available online: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.08374 (accessed on 5
      November 2021).
12.   Koufos, K.; Haloui, K.; Dianati, M.; Higgins, M.; Elmirghani, J.; Imran, M.; Tafazolli, R. Trends in Intelligent Communication
      Systems: Review of Standards, Major Research Projects, and Identification of Research Gaps. J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 60.
      [CrossRef]
13.   Dryjanski, M.; Kliks, A. A Hierarchical and Modular Radio Resource Management Architecture for 5G and Beyond. IEEE
      Commun. Mag. 2020, 58, 28–34. [CrossRef]
14.   Dryjanski, M.; Szydelko, M. A unified traffic steering framework for LTE radio access network coordination. IEEE Commun. Mag.
      2016, 54, 84–92. [CrossRef]
15.   O-RAN.WG3.RICARCH-v01.01. Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent Controller (Near-RT RIC) Architecture, O-RAN Alliance. 2020.
      Available online: https://www.o-ran.org/specifications (accessed on 10 November 2021).
16.   Perveen, A.; Abozariba, R.; Patwary, M.; Aneiba, A. Dynamic traffic forecasting and fuzzy-based optimized admission control in
      federated 5G-open RAN networks. Neural Comput. Appl. 2021, 1–19. [CrossRef]
17.   O-RAN.WG2.AIML-v01.03, AI/ML Workflow Description and Requirements, O-RAN Alliance. November 2021. Available
      online: https://www.o-ran.org/specifications (accessed on 10 November 2021).
18.   Zhang, N.; Zhang, S.; Wu, S.; Ren, J.; Mark, J.W.; Shen, X. Beyond Coexistence: Traffic Steering in LTE Networks with Unlicensed
      Bands. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 2016, 23, 40–46. [CrossRef]
19.   Zhang, S.; Zhang, N.; Zhou, S.; Gong, J.; Niu, Z.; Shen, X. Energy-Sustainable Traffic Steering for 5G Mobile Networks. IEEE
      Commun. Mag. 2017, 55, 54–60. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2021, 21, 8173                                                                                                        14 of 14




20.   Choi, Y.-I.; Kim, J.H. Reliable data transmission in 5G Network using Access Traffic Steering method. In Proceedings of the 2020
      International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC), Jeju, Korea, 21–23 October 2020;
      pp. 1034–1038. [CrossRef]
21.   Anwar, M.R.; Wang, S.; Akram, M.F.; Raza, S.; Mahmood, S. 5G Enabled MEC: A Distributed Traffic Steering for Seamless Service
      Migration of Internet of Vehicles. IEEE Internet Things J. 2021, 1. [CrossRef]
22.   O-RAN.WG2.Use-Case-Requirements-v02.01, Non-RT RIC & A1 Interface: Use Cases and Requirements, O-RAN Alliance.
      November 2020. Available online: https://www.o-ran.org/specifications (accessed on 10 November 2021).
23.   Xu, X.; Yuan, C.; Chen, W.; Tao, X.; Sun, Y. Adaptive Cell Zooming and Sleeping for Green Heterogeneous Ultradense Networks.
      IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2017, 67, 1612–1621. [CrossRef]
24.   O-RAN.WG1.Slicing-Architecture-v05.00, Slicing Architecture, O-RAN Alliance. June 2021. Available online: https://www.o-
      ran.org/specifications (accessed on 10 November 2021).
