              sensors
Review
Cloud-Native Workload Orchestration at the Edge: A
Deployment Review and Future Directions
Rafael Vaño 1 , Ignacio Lacalle 1, * , Piotr Sowiński 2,3 , Raúl S-Julián 1                          and Carlos E. Palau 1

                                           1   Communications Department, Universitat Politècnica de València, 46022 Valencia, Spain
                                           2   Systems Research Institute, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Newelska 6, 01-447 Warsaw, Poland
                                           3   Warsaw University of Technology, pl. Politechniki 1, 00-661 Warsaw, Poland
                                           *   Correspondence: iglaub@upv.es


                                           Abstract: Cloud-native computing principles such as virtualization and orchestration are key to
                                           transferring to the promising paradigm of edge computing. Challenges of containerization, operative
                                           models and scarce availability of established tools make a thorough review indispensable. Therefore,
                                           the authors have described the practical methods and tools found in the literature as well as in
                                           current community-led development projects, and have thoroughly exposed the future directions
                                           of the field. Container virtualization and its orchestration through Kubernetes have dominated
                                           the cloud computing domain, while major efforts have been recently recorded focused on the
                                           adaptation of these technologies to the edge. Such initiatives have addressed either the reduction of
                                           container engines and the development of specific tailored operating systems or the development of
                                           smaller K8s distributions and edge-focused adaptations (such as KubeEdge). Finally, new workload
                                           virtualization approaches, such as WebAssembly modules together with the joint orchestration of
                                           these heterogeneous workloads, seem to be the topics to pay attention to in the short to medium term.

                                           Keywords: edge computing; cloud computing; edge-to-cloud computing continuum; edge-native;
                                           cloud-native; container; Kubernetes; microVM; Unikernel; WebAssembly




Citation: Vaño, R.; Lacalle, I.;           1. Introduction
Sowiński, P.; S-Julián, R.; Palau, C.E.
                                                The leading technological companies have been focused for the last ten to fifteen years
Cloud-Native Workload
                                           on developing their systems and services in “the cloud”, where computing capabilities and
Orchestration at the Edge: A
                                           infrastructure are offered remotely on demand. It involves different concepts depending
Deployment Review and Future
                                           on the requested service: Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS),
Directions. Sensors 2023, 23, 2215.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s23042215
                                           Software as a Service (SaaS) and Functions as a Service (FaaS). A characteristic of this
                                           paradigm is that the supporting hardware (which is usually located in datacenters) is
Academic Editor: Anfeng Liu                highly homogenous. Usually, all machines that are part of a cloud deployment have uni-
Received: 14 January 2023
                                           form configurations, for instance, the same ad hoc operating systems that might have been
Revised: 13 February 2023                  customized by vendors to achieve a better global performance bearing in mind the type of
Accepted: 14 February 2023                 service provided. High network bandwidth and reliability are often guaranteed in cloud
Published: 16 February 2023                computing as well. However, there is a recent observable trend to move the computation
                                           to more local environments, favoring the so-called edge computing. Here, devices located
                                           at the edge tier of the computing continuum are charged with more processing duties,
                                           reducing the work to be delivered by the cloud. In this environment, the underlying com-
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.          puting hardware is entirely diverse; heterogeneous in CPU architectures and constrained in
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.         resources, not fully controlled by system owners (less customizable and less powerful) and
This article is an open access article     deployed in the field, where network connection is often non-reliable [1]. Although much
distributed under the terms and            work and effort is being put towards realizing this new paradigm, it is still undeniable that
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                           cloud computing has a grade of maturity not achieved by the edge [2]. Looking widely
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                           at the currently existing gaps, there are two that stand out: orchestration and Continuous
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                           Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD). Cloud computing has achieved a high level
4.0/).




Sensors 2023, 23, 2215. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23042215                                                     https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                           2 of 27




                         of automation thanks to well-explored techniques ranging from virtualization, container-
                         ization, container orchestration, microservices or DevOps, to CI/CD pipelines, which allow
                         cloud deployments to be very dynamic and efficient. The relevance of these features has
                         made the community refer to them as cloud-native traits. Such techniques, despite having
                         many different implementations, can be considered vendor-agnostic de facto standards,
                         starting from the most relevant single tool: Kubernetes (K8s). Thus, the gap is evident
                         when comparing both paradigms, as there are no equivalent edge-native techniques yet, or
                         those are in an early development stage. The goal of such techniques should be to devise
                         vendor-agnostic standards that would allow efficient CI/CD and orchestration of services
                         in the same way that has been created for the cloud, and as much as possible, recycling
                         or adapting those to the edge, taking advantage of their long-term production stage. The
                         goal of this paper is to perform a review from a deployment point of view of the progress
                         exerted by the scientific community to realize such cloud (now, edge) native techniques for
                         the edge computing paradigm.
                               The review has been performed following a deployment-first orientation together
                         with a literature analysis methodology. First, the specific scope of the paper was clearly
                         identified. Afterwards, a series of searches in usual article databases considering the
                         target knowledge domain (such as IEEE, Elsevier, Springer, Google Scholar), among which
                         results were selected with those that included similar reviews or analyses. In parallel, a
                         thorough analysis of alternative sources was conducted. Among those, authors priorities
                         open repositories (e.g., GitHub tools and collections of reference sources), deliverables
                         and whitepapers distributed by research projects and relevant, well-known clusters or
                         standardization entities (such as Cloud Native Computing Foundation or Alliance of
                         Internet of Things Initiative). Once those efforts were performed, the analyzed pieces
                         were categorized by the type of virtualization addressed, whether they presented (or not)
                         commercial approaches, focused on orchestration, focused on the deployment of workloads,
                         and those that were focused on future trends and promises rather than on current cases.
                               This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, a succinct analysis of the context and
                         the compelling need for such a review is carried out. Section 3 reviews the first and foremost
                         cloud-native technique to be applied to the edge: service virtualization and deployment in
                         constrained devices. Section 4 provides an overview of the holistic commercial solutions
                         that have been specifically addressed to the edge from a cloud-native perspective. After
                         that, Section 5 lists the deployment options of the most common type of service workloads
                         (containers) within the edge paradigm, while Section 6 analyzes the orchestration of those
                         containers using frameworks such as K8s. In Section 7, the authors describe the most recent
                         trends that are paving the way for the future of edge-native deployments: moving beyond
                         containers only. Finally, Section 8 embodies the reflections and conclusions obtained by the
                         authors after the conducted review.

                         2. Background
                               Edge-native as a concept was first introduced by Satyanarayanan et al. in 2019 [3].
                         After that, it has been used in multiple fora by companies such as IBM, Cisco, and oth-
                         ers, settling as the most popular term to refer to the application of cloud-native design
                         principles on edge computing devices. These cornerstone principles are microservices-
                         centricity (achieving modular distributed system deployment), containerization, dynamic
                         management, orchestration and scheduling, and DevOps [4].
                               There is a growing interest in research on transferring technologies and tools to the
                         edge to comply with such principles, applying agility, adaptability, affordability, and
                         accessibility traits to edge scenarios. This interest is mostly manifested by the launching
                         of so-called projects, particularly those promoted by renowned open-source initiatives
                         like Linux Foundation (LF Edge line [5]) or Eclipse Foundation (Edge Native Working
                         Group [6]). Especially relevant is here the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF),
                         the vendor-neutral hub that has standardized and fostered cloud-native principles and
                         technologies like Kubernetes, etcd, CoreDNS, gRPC, and many others. CNCF has launched
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                             3 of 27




                         a series of incubated and sandbox projects under their umbrella specifically pursuing
                         edge-native goals [7]. In addition, ad hoc funding tenders have been scheduled by public
                         entities such as the European Commission (EC) [8], such as the development of meta
                         operating systems (meta-OS) to be installed in edge computing nodes [9], or distributed
                         smart orchestration of various workloads across the edge and cloud computing fabric using
                         Artificial Intelligence (AI) [10]. The former aims at realizing the so-called IoT-edge-cloud
                         computing continuum, which roots its success on applying cloud-native techniques along
                         the entire computational spectrum. Following the open-source spirit of Eclipse and CNCF,
                         the EC has launched an ambitious initiative: EUCloudEdgeIoT.eu, that aims to bring
                         together all European research actions seeking to devise such computing continuums with
                         a common stack of open-source technologies [11].
                               It is precisely under the IoT-edge-cloud computing continuum working action where
                         this article was born. Authors have participated in two EC-funded actions investigating
                         aspects related to edge computing. First, the ASSIST-IoT research and innovation action [12]
                         pursues to develop a reference architecture for next-generation Internet of Things (IoT)
                         leveraging cloud-native orchestration (i.e., using K8s distributions) to manage IoT work-
                         loads and provide specific advanced features. Second, the aerOS action [13] intends to
                         build a generic meta-OS (to be run by many heterogeneous nodes) that lays infrastructure
                         management on secure, trusted, and automated AI mechanisms. During the former, the
                         authors identified a series of CNCF-promoted tools and lightweight K8s versions, which
                         might be applicable across the continuum; however, there has not been enough grounding
                         or proof of success to consolidate a single reference yet. Through the latter, authors are
                         investigating how to simultaneously harmonize edge and cloud clusters using different
                         virtualization and workload management techniques.
                               The authors found several recent surveys [2,14] describing the actual status of edge
                         computing. Those range from general analyses of architectures and potential use cases to nar-
                         rowly focused research on specific aspects of the edge, such as security [15], networking [16]
                         or mobile edge computing (MEC) [17,18]—mainly addressed by telecom operators more
                         concerned to 5G innovations. Found surveys and reviews often compare edge to cloud, but
                         only a few delve into the deployment and orchestration options [19], which is the scope
                         of this work. In fact, a common reality was faced; first during both formerly described
                         EC-funded actions and then after the review of existing relevant works: namely, the lack
                         of a serious review of the available options for bringing containerization, orchestration
                         and workloads management to the edge in a way that is adapted to the requirements of
                         heterogeneous, resource-constrained scenarios. It was noticed that even though there exist
                         some theoretical investigations [4], as well as specific descriptions of how some elements
                         (e.g., containers) should be adapted to the edge [20], a practical, systematic consolidation
                         of the existing deployable technologies with a summative evaluation was still missing. The
                         previous, in turn, prevents scientists and engineers from tackling the practical problem of
                         realizing cloud-inspired virtualization and orchestration of the edge in a straightforward
                         manner. Addressing such a problem is, indeed, of special importance as it lies right at the
                         core of the current challenges and issues of the edge computing field. Among the most com-
                         pelling challenges, there is reliability assurance in terms of security in data exchange, better
                         DevOps and CI/CD and network availability for microservice operations [21]. Besides,
                         finding an operating model seems to also be one of the most prominent barriers. According
                         to works, that could be alleviated by applying a combination of the already-successful
                         microservices and cloud-native principles in the edge [22]. As a note, for the foreseeable
                         future, overweight imposed by usual container management frameworks might also be a
                         challenge. Thus, this article was initiated.
                               The main motivation behind this work is to allow those specialists to understand
                         the current options and issues in a holistic way, as well as to provide critical insight
                         into the short- and medium-term trends. It is worth mentioning that, being a deployment-
                         oriented review, it has gone beyond pure scientific literature analysis (that would most likely
                         transpire outdated results) and has broadened its scope to other sources such as open-source
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                             4 of 27




                         development projects or successful use cases. Indeed, agile, dynamic opensource software
                         initiatives are now the forerunners to the advances in this field. Thus, scientific reviews
                         must include this perspective in the analysis so that it is up-to-date and provide useful
                         insights for the research community. Consequently, this strategy seems to be appropriate
                         for this research field, as the outcomes are usually more likely to be published in public
                         code repositories, blogs or websites (primarily from reference institutions such as the
                         CNCF and enterprises such as Docker Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA) rather than in formalized
                         scientific publications.

                         3. Virtualization: From Cloud Computing to Constrained Environments
                               One of the main keystones behind the success of cloud computing is the capacity to vir-
                         tualize the available resources and the ability to manage workloads (services/applications)
                         in an efficient way over virtualized hardware [23]. Virtual Machines (VMs) were the first
                         attempt, enabling the creation of smaller instances of machines over the same physical
                         infrastructure. This paradigm dominated the cloud computing arena for several years until
                         new approaches appeared aiming to solve several shortcomings of VMs. First, the over-
                         head created by the need to install multiple OSs to support different VMs was hindering
                         the potential to devote those resources to actual workloads. In addition, the workloads
                         became very diverse and heterogeneous (video streaming, sensor data processing, AI . . .),
                         requiring dynamicity in the installation and management, something that VM hypervisors
                         were not able to provide [24]. Furthermore, the utilization of hypervisors required system
                         owners and developers to be aware of the needed resources and the infrastructure to be
                         selected to deploy their services or applications. Several initiatives appeared with the aim
                         of overcoming those issues, having major success in the cloud computing field. In this
                         subsection, those initiatives are described from the viewpoint of edge computing.
                               To solve the latter problem (required knowledge of underlying hardware and re-
                         sources), a paradigm arose called serverless. Serverless architectures are widely adopted by
                         public cloud providers, offering their customers the possibility of running their applications
                         without having to take care of: (1) the infrastructure where it will be really deployed and
                         (2) for how long to reserve it. This paradigm has been especially successful in the public
                         cloud as it builds upon the assumption that the available computing resources are well
                         identified (e.g., as in datacenters) and that the infrastructure is easily manageable and acces-
                         sible in a uniform way by a single operator (cloud provider). However, these principles are
                         exactly orthogonal to the reality of edge computing, where a software architect cannot omit
                         the insights regarding the infrastructure when an application’s deployment must take into
                         account the underlying heterogeneity of resources. Notwithstanding, some initiatives for
                         applying serverless mechanisms to the edge have arisen. Especially relevant are those that
                         rely on the temporal dynamicity of services deployment in order to downscale or upscale
                         on demand the resources devoted to services, optimizing resource consumption (which is
                         of paramount importance on the edge). Examples following this approach are projects such
                         as OpenFaaS [25] and Knative [26], which take advantage of the Kubernetes technology
                         (see Section 6). Knative (which is an incubating project of the CNCF) also provides a
                         complete event-driven engine based on CloudEvents, a specification to standardize event
                         data descriptions, which opens a wide range of possibilities in K8s-based architectures on
                         the edge [27]. With the inclusion of this event-driven engine, the deployed services can
                         trigger different events to activate some functionalities or workloads without modifying
                         the source code.
                               To solve the former problem (overheads caused by installing one OS per each virtual
                         machine), a paradigm arose called container virtualization. Container virtualization implies
                         the use of containers to isolate applications and their dependencies into smaller units that
                         contain the service to be deployed. The ruling principle of container virtualization is that no
                         hypervisor (plus OS per machine) is needed; in contrast, the host’s single OS is virtualized,
                         allowing containers to be deployed isolated, but still sharing the same kernel [28]. This
                         makes containers much more lightweight and scalable. Because of all these advantages, con-
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                           5 of 27




                         tainers have become the de facto standard for running virtualized deployments in the cloud
                         (cloud-native) and also are the natural evolution of the legacy VM-based deployments [29].
                         Several container technologies exist (e.g., LXC [30]—LinuX Containers—was one of the first
                         developed container runtimes), but since Docker was released in 2013, this technology has
                         been the standard solution for this virtualization technique. Docker has been successfully
                         tested and adopted in production-grade deployments around the industry’s public and
                         private clouds for different purposes. The objective of this review work is not to explain
                         the functioning of the containers along with the technology that is behind them (there
                         are strong works in the literature aiming at this purpose, such as [24,29] or [31]), but to
                         review from a deployment perspective how these mechanisms are used in the field of edge
                         computing. Although the hardware limitations of edge devices can make it impossible to
                         run the Docker Engine on them (which is the most used container engine and has remained
                         the de facto standard for the container virtualization), authors have found that containers
                         are widely used in edge scenarios with a variety of deployment options, as described
                         in Section 5.
                              It should be noted that the area of systems based on cloud-native computing prin-
                         ciples is evolving rapidly to meet the shifting demands of the industry. Current chal-
                         lenges and open issues include unified orchestration for heterogeneous systems, federated
                         management domains, leveraging artificial intelligence for automatic resource manage-
                         ment and data interoperability [32,33]. Interestingly, the surveys also acknowledge that
                         one of the main challenges is applying the existing cloud-native principles to the entire
                         edge-to-cloud continuum.

                         4. Current Commercial Approaches from Public Cloud Providers
                              Most public cloud providers have addressed edge computing as an extension of
                         their own cloud infrastructure scope. Consequently, the majority of available solutions
                         from those companies consist of their standard commercial cloud products, but assuming
                         customers’ premises as the central cloud locations. In addition, those providers have also
                         devised and created their own hardware devices for the edge adapted to run their new
                         (cloud) edge solutions. This way, cloud providers made sure that the selected equipment
                         would be plug-and-play, prepared to run their products, keeping their advantages and
                         service level with zero configuration needed from the final user. However, apart from
                         creating huge vendor lock-in environments, most of these frameworks are not actually
                         edge-native solutions responding to the relevant requirements; they only shift workloads
                         outside the cloud infrastructure but without breaking a strong dependency on the cloud or
                         adapting architectural paradigms to the edge. This section analyzes those solutions that are
                         provided by the large public cloud providers.
                              Amazon Web Services (AWS) offers a solution named AWS IoT Greengrass for de-
                         ploying processing capabilities over nodes at the edge tier of the architecture, especially
                         over IoT devices that gather data from various attached sensors [34]. This solution includes
                         serverless-based deployments in the devices using AWS Lambda, the serverless approach
                         of AWS. It transforms models that were previously created in the cloud into Lambda
                         functions, that are then shifted to the edge (where container virtualization and AI inference
                         equipment exist) to be run. To avoid network connectivity loss problems, Greengrass
                         creates a virtual twin of the device that ensures compliance with the desired state in the
                         cloud, as long as there is a reliable connection; otherwise, it re-synchronizes whenever it is
                         re-established and calibrates to reassure the desired state again. In addition, inter-device
                         communication is allowed inside a local network without depending on the cloud. As for
                         device management, AWS IoT Greengrass is highly configurable from a remote location,
                         allowing the addition and removal of (even customized) hardware and software modules.
                         Another solution by AWS for the edge is AWS Snowball Edge, a device type from the
                         AWS Snowball family that is designed to work at the customer’s premises [35]. Amazon
                         offers three versions of such a device that aim to enhance different demanded capabilities:
                         storage-optimized for data transfer (80TB of usable storage capacity), storage-optimized
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                           6 of 27




                         with EC2 compute functionality (AWS product focused on proving computing capabilities
                         on demand) and compute-optimized (with 104 vCPUs and 416 GB of memory). Similar to
                         Greengrass modules, Snowball edge devices can be managed locally and through the cloud.
                         Furthermore, they can run powerful workloads to move all locally stored data to the AWS
                         S3 storage service in the cloud and control the deployments running on the Greengrass
                         devices. Finally, these devices can be classified as the top layer of the edge tier of the
                         computing continuum because they provide great computing capabilities, approaching a
                         small cloud datacenter.
                              Microsoft Azure provides a complete stack for edge computing under its Azure IoT
                         Edge framework, including remote equipment management, edge-level virtualization,
                         and remote workload allocation and control [36]. This technology is delivered with an
                         open-source MIT license via the GitHub account of Azure, allowing developers to deploy
                         and integrate Azure’s edge stack in their own infrastructure. However, interoperability
                         is not complete, as the installation depends on the Azure cloud stack. Both Azure and
                         AWS have delivered several series of their own certified devices targeting the lowest and
                         medium tier of the edge computing range (some of them are based on popular embedded
                         boards, such as Raspberry Pi, NVIDIA Jetson and Intel boards). This certification consists
                         of the validation by the Azure cloud engineers that a device “can connect with Azure IoT
                         Hub and securely provision through the Device Provisioning Service (DPS)” [37]. Similar
                         to Amazon, Microsoft offers a line of powerful equipment to bring the Azure services to the
                         customer’s premises and remote locations (near the sources of data), lowering the amount
                         of data to be uploaded to the cloud by the Azure Stack Edge. This equipment is divided
                         into two lines of products: Edge Pro Series, a line focused on powerful products to be
                         located both in a local datacenter (Pro and Pro 2), and transportable equipment that can
                         contain an uninterruptable power supply (Pro R); Edge Mini Series, a constrained portable
                         device with a battery [38].
                              Google Cloud integrates edge computing solutions under its Google Distributed
                         Cloud solution. Google devised a complete edge-to-cloud continuum infrastructure by
                         offering services that can be deployed on all of their own-defined tiers of the edge-to-cloud
                         architecture layers (Google’s network edge, telecommunications operators’ edge, customers’
                         datacenters, and customer’ remote edge), including the telecommunication service provider
                         network layer and the possibility of virtualizing telcos’ 5G network elements [39].
                              A common aspect of all the mentioned proposals by prominent cloud providers is the
                         lack of interoperability and the high degree of vendor lock-in. Whereas the mechanisms
                         and technologies that will be introduced in further sections (K8s distributions, KubeEdge,
                         and other orchestrators) are open and oriented to comply with certain baselines of cloud-
                         native principles, the commercial systems presented here create closer ecosystems tied to
                         interdependencies, specific configurations, particular ways of structuring and deploying
                         applications, etc.

                         5. Container Virtualization: Deploying Container Workloads on the Edge
                              In 2015, the Open Container Initiative (OCI) was founded by the container technology
                         leaders (Docker, CoreOS, . . .) in order to specify a standard for container virtualization.
                         This action resulted in the creation of three specifications: the Runtime Specification
                         (runtime-spec, the specification for running containers), the Image Specification (image-spec,
                         for packaging containers in images) and the Distribution Specification (distribution-spec,
                         for sharing and using container images) [40]. Two years later, when the Docker engine
                         was established as the technological reference for containers, Docker open-sourced the
                         code of its container platform, divided into modules (including its high-level container
                         runtime—containerd [41] and its low-level container runtime—runC [42]), with the purpose
                         of bringing the capability of building fully customized container-based systems to system
                         builders. This innovation received the name the Moby Project [43]. It allowed engineers
                         to focus on the development of lighter container runtimes through the reduction of their
                         internal components and the removal of unnecessary modules in order to increase their
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                                                   7 of 27




                               performance or even to design specific operating systems incorporating such runtimes,
                               which appear to be interesting trends for both cloud and edge. Subsequent subsections
                               dig deeper into these two approaches and the initiatives that have been identified for edge
                               computing scenarios.

                               5.1. Container Engines
                                       Container engines (e.g., Docker, Podman) are comprised of tools for building and
                                  running container images. To achieve the latter, a high-level container runtime (also
                                  referred to as the container manager, this block controls the transport and management of
                                  images) interacts with a low-level container runtime (the block that receives the unpackaged
                                  container image from the high-level runtime and finally runs the container inside the system
                                  interacting with the host’s OS kernel), as shown in Figure 1. As mentioned in the previous
                                 paragraph,
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW            Docker Engine’s runtime (de-facto standard) materializes in containerd and  8 of 27
                                  runC. However, there are other runtime implementations that have been developed with
                                  edge computing constraints in mind.




                                Figure1.1.Container
                               Figure      Containerworkflow
                                                     workflowblock
                                                               block architecture.
                                                                   architecture.

                                 5.2. crun   is a low-level
                                      Purpose‐Built             container
                                                         Operating           runtime fully compliant with the OCI runtime specifi-
                                                                       Systems
                               cation that is written in C, the same as LXC and the Linux kernel, unlike runC, which is
                                       In the same way that container runtimes are being reduced to target a wider range of
                               written in Go. Here, crun improves upon runC, as C can bring better performance than Go.
                                 systems, some specific OSs have appeared that take advantage of reduced and portable
                               Furthermore, the crun binary is vastly smaller than the runC binary (300 KB versus 15 MB).
                                 runtimes with the main goal of bringing container virtualization to increasingly con‐
                               As a matter of fact, in some studies crun has proved to perform better in a test consisting of
                                 strained, as well as embedded devices.
                               running sequentially 100 containers. In the test, crun achieved the goal in 1.69 s, while runC
                                       EVE‐OS is an operating system originally developed by ZEDEDA and then donated
                               took 3.34 s [44].
                                 underRustanisopen‐source
                                                a programming   license   to the Linux
                                                                      language           Foundation
                                                                                  that released  its 1.0 that has in
                                                                                                          version   included    it inside
                                                                                                                       2020; since         itshas
                                                                                                                                     then it   edge
                               been established as a strong alternative to C and C++ due to remarkable improvementsOS
                                 research     projects   stack   (LF‐Edge)     [47]. The  main   purpose     for the   development      of  this
                               inismemory
                                    to provide     edgeRust
                                               safety.    computing       devices
                                                                also betters    Go with
                                                                                    in thea implementation
                                                                                            universal, vendor‐agnostic        and standardized
                                                                                                                of system calls,     which has
                                 architecture
                               pushed             OS, following
                                           its usage    to developthe      same
                                                                        youki,  anstrategy   that Google
                                                                                    OCI-compliant           used in
                                                                                                       low-level       the smartphone
                                                                                                                     container    runtime market
                                                                                                                                             that
                                 when    it  delivered    Android.      EVE‐OS     has  adopted    well‐known
                               shares with crun the reduction of binary size, making both suitable for environmentsopen‐source       projects  such
                                 as  Xen    Project,   LinuxKit      and   Alpine    Linux   for its development.
                               with constrained resources. In a similar test performed for crun, youki showed a better  Currently,     the  remote
                                 managementcompared
                               performance          of a fleet toof runC,
                                                                     devices  running
                                                                           while         EVE‐OS following
                                                                                   crun remained                 a Zero
                                                                                                     as the fastest   one Trust
                                                                                                                           [45]. security model
                                 is possible
                                      Focusing  using
                                                   on thethehigh-level
                                                              Adam controller,
                                                                          runtimes,the    reference
                                                                                       CRI-O   appearsimplementation
                                                                                                         to be one of theofmorean LF‐Edge      API‐
                                                                                                                                     interesting
                                 compliantItController.
                               solutions.                      Furthermore,
                                                 is a lightweight      containerEVE‐OS
                                                                                   runtimeprovides       support
                                                                                              specifically         for running
                                                                                                            designed                containerized
                                                                                                                         for Kubernetes      [46].
                                 workloads
                               Its              using containerd
                                    main advantage                      and for
                                                          is the reduction     of running
                                                                                  resource Kubernetes
                                                                                             consumptiondistributions
                                                                                                             in comparison   onwith
                                                                                                                                 top Docker’s
                                                                                                                                       of it. EVE’s
                               containerd,     Moby     or  rkt  (also   analyzed),   and   its compatibility    with
                                 contributors have recently announced an architecture proposal for integrating EVE with  any  OCI-compliant
                               low-level
                                 Kubernetes  runtime,    an interesting
                                                  at a control             feature
                                                                  plane level       that
                                                                                [48].    allows
                                                                                       The  OS isthis  runtime
                                                                                                   designed      toedge
                                                                                                               for   run workloads
                                                                                                                          devices with  notreason‐
                                                                                                                                             only
                               based    on containers,
                                 able computing             a promising
                                                        capabilities        trend thatofis512
                                                                         (minimum          covered
                                                                                                MB ofin Section   7 of this article.
                                                                                                        RAM memory)          and has  However,
                                                                                                                                         been pre‐
                                 pared to be deployed in a wide range of CPU architectures. Moreover, EVE‐OS has
                                 enough functionalities to be deployed on bare metal and supports a wide range of work‐
                                 loads that can be combined: Docker containers, Kubernetes clusters, and virtual machines.
                                       BalenaOS is a host operating system with the purpose of running Docker containers
                                 on embedded devices and has been made to survive harsh networking conditions and
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                            8 of 27




                         CRI-O has not been developed for use in low-resource embedded devices, requiring the
                         target device to be able to run Kubernetes. Therefore, there remains much research to do in
                         the field of high-level runtimes specifically designed for edge-tier devices.

                         5.2. Purpose-Built Operating Systems
                              In the same way that container runtimes are being reduced to target a wider range of
                         systems, some specific OSs have appeared that take advantage of reduced and portable
                         runtimes with the main goal of bringing container virtualization to increasingly constrained,
                         as well as embedded devices.
                              EVE-OS is an operating system originally developed by ZEDEDA and then donated
                         under an open-source license to the Linux Foundation that has included it inside its edge
                         research projects stack (LF-Edge) [47]. The main purpose for the development of this OS is
                         to provide edge computing devices with a universal, vendor-agnostic and standardized
                         architecture OS, following the same strategy that Google used in the smartphone market
                         when it delivered Android. EVE-OS has adopted well-known open-source projects such
                         as Xen Project, LinuxKit and Alpine Linux for its development. Currently, the remote
                         management of a fleet of devices running EVE-OS following a Zero Trust security model
                         is possible using the Adam controller, the reference implementation of an LF-Edge API-
                         compliant Controller. Furthermore, EVE-OS provides support for running containerized
                         workloads using containerd and for running Kubernetes distributions on top of it. EVE’s
                         contributors have recently announced an architecture proposal for integrating EVE with
                         Kubernetes at a control plane level [48]. The OS is designed for edge devices with reasonable
                         computing capabilities (minimum of 512 MB of RAM memory) and has been prepared
                         to be deployed in a wide range of CPU architectures. Moreover, EVE-OS has enough
                         functionalities to be deployed on bare metal and supports a wide range of workloads that
                         can be combined: Docker containers, Kubernetes clusters, and virtual machines.
                              BalenaOS is a host operating system with the purpose of running Docker containers
                         on embedded devices and has been made to survive harsh networking conditions and
                         unexpected shutdowns [49]. The OS is based on Yocto Linux, which provides a small
                         memory footprint and the possibility of easily porting it to more powerful devices across
                         a variety of CPU architectures [50]. Its purpose is to replicate cloud operating systems’
                         applications deployment in edge computing devices through the use of containers (cloud-
                         native to edge-native). For this purpose, Balena has developed its own container engine
                         (balenaEngine [51]) based on Moby project technology. The engine was adapted through:
                         (1) the removal of the “heavy” Docker features oriented to the cloud (Swarm, plugin
                         support, overlay networking drivers . . .) not suiting edge nodes, and also (2) through the
                         addition of particular features specifically intended for less-powerful computing devices
                         (support for the most common CPU architectures on single-board computers, improvement
                         of container image pulling to prevent network failures . . .). At this moment, the OS is
                         supported by up to 20 device types.
                              The Balena company offers as a service Balena Cloud, an automated platform to
                         manage infrastructure running BalenaOS and the workloads deployed in such devices,
                         which has been optimized for the edge. Last but not least, Balena has delivered this
                         management software in an open-source way for advanced users or infrastructure managers
                         that want to host this platform on their own premises without depending on Balena. By
                         using this platform, developers are able to deploy application containers, push updates,
                         check status, and view logs of the fleet of devices that have been previously registered.
                              According to the Pantacor company, Docker was built without considering embedded
                         devices, as it requires a high level of resource availability. In order to relax those require-
                         ments, they developed Pantavisor, a minimal low-level container runtime written in C that
                         shares commonalities with crun (getting closer to the Linux kernel) [52]. Pantavisor has
                         the purpose of shifting systems into a set of portable microservices (materialized in Linux
                         containers) instead of the traditional scheme of firmware plus applications. According to
                         Pantacor, Pantavisor “is meant to be a single-binary init system that boots directly from the
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                             9 of 27




                         kernel and becomes the first process to run, which then brings up the rest of the system
                         as a set of well-defined micro-containers” [53]. This container runtime is compatible with
                         ARM, MIPS, RISC-V, x86, and PowerPC CPU architectures, has a running footprint of just
                         around 350 KB and requires a minimum of only 64 MB of RAM.
                               In contrast with the traditional container-based architectures, Pantavisor does not
                         need a container runtime running on top of a complete OS. This is more suitable, then, for
                         embedded devices as they might not use all features of a host OS. Thus, by containerizing
                         the host OS layer, Pantavisor transforms it into a container, embodying the traits of updata-
                         bility, scalability, etc. In this architecture, Pantavisor acts as the minimal container runtime
                         manager of the system. Same as Balena, Pantacor provides a framework (PantacorHub)
                         to manage the devices running Pantavisor and the workloads deployed on them. As an
                         interesting note, it is offered either as an open-source tool for self-hosting or as a paid
                         service hosted by the company itself.

                         6. Container Orchestration Tools for the Edge
                              Although containers can be managed using their own interfaces, some tools have
                         appeared on top of container virtualization technologies to better manage and orchestrate
                         the deployment, allowing scheduling, scaling and control. Kubernetes (K8s) has become
                         the standard for container and microservices orchestration in the cloud, gaining advan-
                         tage over its competitors in recent years, such as Docker Swarm or Apache Mesos [54].
                         Consequently, as K8s is a highly customizable and open technology, most cloud providers
                         have delivered their own K8s distributions that are fully compliant with the standard in
                         order to optimize the integration of K8s with their systems. As reviewed in the previous
                         section, bringing containers to edge computing deployments is possible, and it is in fact
                         being implemented. Therefore, to transfer cloud-native traits provided by a standardized
                         container orchestration tool (K8s) to the edge, an equivalent technology—adapted to edge
                         computing—must be found. This is a relevant point, as Kubernetes itself does not seem
                         to be the proper solution. Although its deployment is feasible in some computing nodes
                         along the computing continuum [55,56] (those that can carry powerful workloads), it does
                         not suit the capacities of more resource-constrained equipment such as far-edge nodes or
                         leaf devices. In some works (e.g., [57,58]), this problem is introduced along with some
                         suggested alternatives. The scope of this section is precisely to analyze potential candidates
                         to become the K8s alternative for container orchestration in edge-computing deployments.
                              The solutions that have been discovered in state-of-the-art investigations are divided
                         into two main groups. The first group focuses on replicating Kubernetes in edge envi-
                         ronments by reducing the memory footprint of this orchestration platform to broaden
                         the range of equipment in which K8s can be fully functional. Here, different lightweight
                         versions of Kubernetes can co-live with a full K8s deployment in the cloud premises,
                         creating a sort of multi-cluster environment so that communication and orchestration in
                         the computing continuum is achieved. This approach is illustrated in Figure 2a. On the
                         other hand, Figure 2b depicts the second trend of creating new frameworks specifically
                         adapted to the edge that follow Kubernetes principles but are not direct simplifications
                         or reductions of that technology. These solutions adapt K8s to the specific characteristics
                         of the edge (unstable network connectivity, difficulty of managing heterogeneous and
                         low-resource equipment), maintaining all its benefits achieved in the cloud and not just
                         limiting themselves to creating another lightweight K8s distribution without reaching a
                         real edge-to-cloud synergy.
                              In the first group, K3s stands out. K3s is a lightweight, fully compliant Kubernetes
                         distribution developed by Rancher. It was created for running in constrained devices,
                         bearing a much lower memory footprint than other available K8s distributions [59]. K3s
                         modifies the K8s paradigm of master and worker nodes, converting them into server and
                         agent nodes. On another note, it offers three possible architectures: (1) a single server with
                         an embedded SQLite database and (2) high-availability servers using an embedded or (3) an
                         external database (SQL-based or etcd). This distribution is also optimized for several CPU
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                           10 of 27




                         architectures, such as ARM32, ARM64, and ARMv7. Henceforth, it becomes preferrable for
                         edge environments (which often use embedded systems as nodes, like Raspberry Pis or
                         NVIDIA Jetson boards). K3s’s minimum requirements are 256 MB of RAM for an agent node,
                         and 512 MB for a server node with some workloads running in the agent node. Rancher
                         also delivered an OS for edge nodes optimized for running K3s, maintaining only minimal
                         resources of the underlying OS: k3OS [60]. Its low memory footprint and the ability to run
                         on devices having diverse CPU architectures converts K3s into the most recommended K8s
                         distribution for building clusters on the edge following the first approach, as mentioned
                         above. It is also supported by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation. As an alternative
                         lightweight K8s distribution, Canonical released MicroK8s, which claims to have a minimal
                         memory usage of around 540 MB, but its recommended memory allocation is 4 GB, which
                         is considerably more than K3s [61]. MicroK8s is clearly less mature and proven than K3s,
                         and according to the authors’ experience, it is not yet ready to be considered a robust option
                         for pure edge-native deployments [62]. Nevertheless, MicroK8s has the advantage of being
                         an easily customizable distribution (via add-ons installed by simply executing its install
                         command). The available add-ons include some of the most widely used K8s modules, such
                         as CoreDNS, Helm or Istio, and the possibility of achieving K8s High Availability features
                         in a straightforward way. These features make MicroK8s one of the most interesting K8s
                         distributions for development and testing in slightly more powerful edge devices (especially
                         those with more than 1 GB of available RAM). These two edge-focused distributions have
                         been compared between them and to a complete K8s distribution installed using Kubespray
                         in [63], giving as a result, a clear performance improvement against a classic distribution
                         without showing significant performance differences between K3s and MicroK8s. Therefore,
                         there is not yet a de facto standard equivalent for K8s on the edge, but K3s holds the
                         advantage of more popularity, better robustness, and a lower memory footprint. It is
                         worth mentioning that these lightweight distributions are specifically designed to deploy
                         K8s-like clusters on the edge tier of the architecture, but they could perfectly work in
                         cloud clusters since these distributions are completely functional and certified by the CNCF.
                         However, a classic Kubernetes installation with K8s clusters is preferred for the cloud
                         premises. As a matter of fact, in order to realize the cloud-to-edge continuum with cloud
                         principles, both topological locations in the architecture should comprise K8s(-like) clusters,
                         materializing the so-called multi-cluster scenario. Multi-cluster techniques are commonly
                         used for enabling an edge-to-cloud synergy between clusters deployed along the edge-
                         to-cloud continuum, but this paradigm comes with a number of drawbacks. Due to the
                         fact of being designed for cloud environments, the inner mechanisms of multi-cluster
                         tools (e.g., communication, networking, high-availability, services discovery . . .) are not
                         currently adapted to the particularities of edge computing. Nonetheless, this is an active
                         research field, and there are some projects and initiatives investigating possible solutions.
                         An illustrative example can be found in the EU H2020 research project ASSIST-IoT, where
                         a K8s-based multi-cluster architecture is devised, in which clusters (K3s is recommended
                         for edge premises) are registered to a smart orchestrator. The orchestrator is in charge
                         of connecting the clusters leveraging Cilium Multi-cluster technology [64], selecting the
                         optimal placement of applications in the computing continuum based on AI policies, and
                         managing their lifecycle [65].
                               In the second group, the design of the deployment differs ostensibly. Some of the
                         devised new frameworks that adapt K8s principles to the edge are based on maintaining
                         the control plane of the system in the cloud, and moving only the needed workloads
                         and specific controllers to the edge, converting it into an autonomous node of the system
                         regarding the application plane. So minimized, essential information from the control plane
                         is cached on the edge or in intermediate nodes in order to be accessible in case of network
                         connectivity issues. Among the analyzed solutions of this type, KubeEdge stands out.
                         KubeEdge [66] is an open-source framework based on the Kubernetes architecture with the
                         main purpose of bringing the full functionalities of Kubernetes to the edge. This ongoing
                         deployment project is officially under the umbrella of the CNCF. The main underlying idea
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                                           11 of 27




                                     of this technology is to keep the entire control plane in the cloud, where the computing
                                     resources are more plentiful, and leave the workloads (running the containers) or the
                                     application plane to the edge in order to dedicate all the constrained computing resources
                                     of this tier for this purpose. Moreover, the task of controlling the communication with
                                     far edge devices without real computing capabilities (sensors, cameras, . . .) is assigned to
                                     the K8s edge nodes. This together translates into a low memory footprint of the EdgeCore
                                     installation (the edge part of KubeEdge) of only around 70 MB. The KubeEdge architecture is
                                     divided into three layers:
                                     • Cloud: for KubeEdge to work properly, there is a need to have a running K8s dis-
                                       tribution in the cloud that will interact with a CloudCore instance (the cloud part of
                                       KubeEdge) deployed on the same host. This cloud part of KubeEdge includes controllers
                                       to synchronize the status of all edge nodes and leaf devices connected to the nodes.
                                  •    Edge: the components deployed inside the EdgeCore handle communication between
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW    application containers, connected devices, and the cloud tier. The K8s pods (workloads    10 of 27
                                       that are orchestrated) are deployed in this layer, but its deployment is controlled by the
                                       cloud. The main difference as compared to a lightweight K8s distribution is that the
                                       edge part of KubeEdge is not a K8s node itself, disposing of the K8s API and its control
                                  computing continuum is achieved. This approach is illustrated in Figure 2a. On the other
                                       plane. The inner components of EdgeCore are illustrated in Figure 3, taken from the
                                  hand, Figure 2b depicts the second trend of creating new frameworks specifically adapted
                                       official site of KubeEdge. In addition, the edge node in a KubeEdge deployment includes
                                  to the edge that follow Kubernetes principles but are not direct simplifications or reduc‐
                                       an MQTT broker to interact with device mappers (the available device protocol mapper
                                  tionstypes
                                        of that
                                              aretechnology.
                                                    Bluetooth, These
                                                                Modbus,solutions   adapt K8s
                                                                            and OPC-UA,        to athe
                                                                                             but    Gospecific
                                                                                                         library characteristics
                                                                                                                  is provided to of   the
                                                                                                                                   allow
                                  edge developers
                                        (unstable network      connectivity,   difficulty of managing     heterogeneous    and
                                                      to create mappers for other protocols). The mappers are in charge of the   low‐re‐
                                  source  equipment),
                                       interaction   andmaintaining    allleaf
                                                          control of the   its benefits
                                                                               devices, achieved
                                                                                         as well asinofthe cloud
                                                                                                        their     and not
                                                                                                              lifecycle    just limiting
                                                                                                                        management.
                                  themselves
                                  •    Devices:to leaf
                                                   creating  another
                                                        devices  withlightweight     K8s distribution
                                                                      almost no computing               withoutThey
                                                                                                capabilities.     reaching  a real
                                                                                                                      interact     edge‐
                                                                                                                                with  the
                                  to‐cloud  synergy.
                                       edge layer through the mappers using various industrial protocols for data exchange.




                               (a)                                                                 (b)
                                 Figure 2. Comparison of architectures for K8s deployment at the edge: (a) K8s multi‐cluster archi‐
                                 Figure 2. Comparison of architectures for K8s deployment at the edge: (a) K8s multi-cluster architec-
                                 tecture using lightweight K8s distributions for the edge clusters; (b) K8s adapted to the edge com‐
                                 ture using lightweight K8s distributions for the edge clusters; (b) K8s adapted to the edge computing
                                 puting requirements general architecture.
                                 requirements general architecture.
                                      In the first group, K3s stands out. K3s is a lightweight, fully compliant Kubernetes
                                 distribution developed by Rancher. It was created for running in constrained devices,
                                 bearing a much lower memory footprint than other available K8s distributions [59]. K3s
                                 modifies the K8s paradigm of master and worker nodes, converting them into server and
                                 agent nodes. On another note, it offers three possible architectures: (1) a single server with
                                 an embedded SQLite database and (2) high‐availability servers using an embedded or (3)
                                 an external database (SQL‐based or etcd). This distribution is also optimized for several
                                 CPU architectures, such as ARM32, ARM64, and ARMv7. Henceforth, it becomes prefer‐
                                 rable for edge environments (which often use embedded systems as nodes, like Raspberry
                                deployment includes an MQTT broker to interact with device mappers (the available
                                device protocol mapper types are Bluetooth, Modbus, and OPC‐UA, but a Go library
                                is provided to allow developers to create mappers for other protocols). The mappers
                                are in charge of the interaction and control of the leaf devices, as well as of their
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215
                                lifecycle management.                                                        12 of 27
                               Devices: leaf devices with almost no computing capabilities. They interact with the
                                edge layer through the mappers using various industrial protocols for data exchange.




                          Figure3.3.KubeEdge
                         Figure      KubeEdgearchitecture
                                              architecture[66].
                                                            [66].

                                AAremarkable
                                    remarkablefeature
                                                   featureofofKubeEdge
                                                                KubeEdgespecifically
                                                                             specificallyintended
                                                                                           intendedfor  foredge-native
                                                                                                            edge‐nativedeployments
                                                                                                                             deployments
                         isisthe
                              thecapability
                                   capabilityofofcoping
                                                   copingwith
                                                            withpoor
                                                                  poornetwork
                                                                         networkconnection
                                                                                     connectionbetween
                                                                                                    betweenthe thecloud
                                                                                                                     cloudandandthetheedge.
                                                                                                                                       edge.
                           Synchronizationis handled
                         Synchronization         is handled onlyonly
                                                                  under under
                                                                           stablestable
                                                                                   networknetwork      conditions,
                                                                                              conditions,               thus achieving
                                                                                                             thus achieving      a smootha
                           smooth management
                         management                   of the environment.
                                           of the environment.       This is a This    is a key
                                                                                  key issue  forissue    for edge‐native
                                                                                                   edge-native                applications
                                                                                                                    applications     that is
                           thatnatively
                         not     is not natively
                                          solved solved
                                                    by K8s,by asK8s,  as non‐cloud
                                                                 non-cloud       aspectsaspects    were dismissed
                                                                                          were dismissed        in its in  its original
                                                                                                                         original        de‐
                                                                                                                                    design.
                         Insign.  In addition,
                              addition,          KubeEdge
                                          KubeEdge           also provides
                                                      also provides              the so‐called
                                                                        the so-called     service service
                                                                                                     meshmesh      capabilities.
                                                                                                            capabilities.           The ser‐
                                                                                                                              The service
                           vice provides
                         mesh    mesh provides       service‐to‐service
                                            service-to-service               communication
                                                                  communication                   and discovery
                                                                                       and discovery                  for alldeployed
                                                                                                         for all services      services on
                                                                                                                                         de‐
                           ployed
                         any   layeronof any  layer of theascontinuum
                                         the continuum        long as those as long  as those
                                                                                services         services are
                                                                                          are controlled        controlled
                                                                                                            by the   same cloudby the  same
                                                                                                                                    master
                         node.
                           cloudThe    service
                                    master      mesh
                                             node.     feature
                                                     The         allows
                                                           service  mesh  forfeature
                                                                               transparent
                                                                                       allowscommunication
                                                                                                 for transparent   in communication
                                                                                                                       complex networkin
                         environments
                           complex network and establishes
                                                  environments high-reliability
                                                                    and establishesscenarios   foreseeing potential
                                                                                         high‐reliability     scenariosnetwork
                                                                                                                           foreseeingissues
                                                                                                                                         po‐
                         through     the distribution
                           tential network                of network
                                               issues through            metadata across
                                                                  the distribution             all themetadata
                                                                                        of network       EdgeMesh        Agents
                                                                                                                     across        andEdge‐
                                                                                                                              all the   the
                         integration
                           Mesh Agents  of lightweight    DNS servers.
                                            and the integration             Its architecture
                                                                     of lightweight             is illustrated
                                                                                        DNS servers.             in Figure 4is(extracted
                                                                                                         Its architecture        illustrated
                         from    KubeEdge’s     official site). Initially,   KubeEdge’s    EdgeMesh
                           in Figure 4 (extracted from KubeEdge’s official site). Initially, KubeEdge’s  was   a  part of   the EdgeCore
                                                                                                                          EdgeMesh     was a
                         component (see Figure 3), but currently, it is delivered as a separate element that can be
                         installed in all edge nodes in order to enable its deployed services to join to the service
                         mesh [67].
                                KubeEdge has successfully gone through a series of scalability tests which demon-
                         strated that the framework was capable of orchestrating one million pods deployed across
                         100K edge nodes, accomplishing the K8s Service Level Indicators (SLI) and Service Level
                         Objectives (SLO). The solution managed the entire infrastructure as a true continuum rep-
                         resented by a single K8s cluster [68]. Similarly, an illustrative use case built using KubeEdge
                         is the deployment of more than 100K monitoring devices across the Hong Kong–Zhuhai–
                         Macao bridge, one of the longest bridges in the world. This work was presented during
                         the Kubernetes on Edge Day Europe 2021 by Huan Wei [69]. The edge tier of KubeEdge is
                         deployed in every device located along the bridge, and all those devices are managed
                         in a centralized manner by the cloud part deployed in a public cloud datacenter. Each
                         monitoring device gathers data from 14 different sensors (CO2 , PM2.5, temperature, hu-
                         midity, . . .) through its specific mapper, and the data is processed locally using AI inference
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                                                      13 of 27




                                  algorithms deployed on the edge nodes. Only selected data is finally uploaded to the cloud
                                  through a reliable 5G connection, but in case of network issues, following the offloading
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                            13 of 27
                                  of the control plane strategy, a cache mechanism on the edge assures that no data is lost
                                  in the process. Taking advantage of the edge-to-cloud synergy achieved in the KubeEdge
                                  project, the same community of developers tried to use this technology to improve the
                                   part of theofEdgeCore
                                  execution      Artificialcomponent
                                                            Intelligence(see Figure 3),
                                                                          workloads   inbut
                                                                                         the currently, it is delivered
                                                                                              edge-to-cloud   continuum.as aFor
                                                                                                                             separate
                                                                                                                                this
                                  purpose, they have developed Sedna, a project focused on implementing collaborative to
                                   element   that can  be installed in all edge  nodes  in order to enable   its deployed services
                                   join to the
                                  training  andservice  mesh
                                                 inference    [67].
                                                            capabilities across the edge-cloud continuum [70].




                                 Figure4.4.KubeEdge’s
                                Figure      KubeEdge’sEdgeMesh
                                                       EdgeMesharchitecture
                                                                architecture[67].
                                                                              [67].

                                       KubeEdge KubeEdge
                                      Although       has successfully
                                                                is the main gone   throughofathe
                                                                                reference         series   of scalability
                                                                                                      second     category of  tests   which demon‐
                                                                                                                                 approaches,    it is
                                not  the only
                                 strated        suchframework
                                          that the      frameworkwas   in existence.
                                                                           capable ofThe      CNCF accepted
                                                                                          orchestrating             as sandbox
                                                                                                            one million             members across
                                                                                                                            pods deployed      two
                                more
                                 100Kprojects:
                                        edge nodes,OpenYurt    [71] (the first
                                                          accomplishing      theopen-source
                                                                                  K8s Serviceproject        carried out(SLI)
                                                                                                   Level Indicators        by the   Chinese
                                                                                                                                  and  Servicegiant
                                                                                                                                                 Level
                                Alibaba)
                                 Objectives      SuperEdge
                                           and(SLO).          [72] (whose
                                                         The solution         realization
                                                                         managed             is led infrastructure
                                                                                       the entire    by Tencent along   as awith
                                                                                                                              trueIntel,   VMware,
                                                                                                                                    continuum      rep‐
                                Huya,    Cambricon,       Captialonline,     and  Meituan).      Both   OpenYurt     and   SuperEdge
                                 resented by a single K8s cluster [68]. Similarly, an illustrative use case built using KubeEdge          are more
                                focused   on edge datacenters
                                 is the deployment        of more than or relatively    large edge
                                                                           100K monitoring             devices
                                                                                                   devices        due the
                                                                                                              across   to their
                                                                                                                            Hong   higher   compu-
                                                                                                                                     Kong–Zhuhai–
                                tational  requirements       as compared       to KubeEdge.      One   of  the   most
                                 Macao bridge, one of the longest bridges in the world. This work was presented during remarkable       features  of
                                OpenYurt    is  the  integration     with   the  EdgeX      Foundry     for  edge   device
                                 the Kubernetes on Edge Day Europe 2021 by Huan Wei [69]. The edge tier of KubeEdge is        management       [73].
                                With   regards
                                 deployed     in to  the required
                                                  every               communication
                                                           device located     along thebetween
                                                                                            bridge, andthe control
                                                                                                             all thoseplane    (in the
                                                                                                                         devices    arecloud)
                                                                                                                                         managedand in
                                edge   nodes,   these   two  projects   share   the  implementation         of  secure
                                 a centralized manner by the cloud part deployed in a public cloud datacenter. Each mon‐tunnels    that  overcome
                                the underlying connection obstacles caused by the interaction of several heterogeneous
                                 itoring device gathers data from 14 different sensors (CO2, PM2.5, temperature, humidity,
                                networks to which edge nodes may belong. According to Alibaba, the principal difference
                                 …) through its specific mapper, and the data is processed locally using AI inference algo‐
                                between OpenYurt and KubeEdge is that the former is less disruptive with the K8s architec-
                                 rithms deployed on the edge nodes. Only selected data is finally uploaded to the cloud
                                ture, as it only enhances K8s through the usage of plugins and operators, while the latter
                                 through a reliable 5G connection, but in case of network issues, following the offloading
                                attempts to rewrite some components such as kubelet or kube-proxy [71]. Another interesting
                                 of the control plane strategy, a cache mechanism on the edge assures that no data is lost
                                technology for bringing container orchestration to the edge is Open Horizon (OH); it was
                                 in the
                                first    process. by
                                      developed      Taking    advantage
                                                         IBM and              of the edge‐to‐cloud
                                                                     then donated                          synergy achieved
                                                                                        to the Linux Foundation          [74]. This in technology
                                                                                                                                        the KubeEdge
                                shares with KubeEdge the concept of moving the workloads to the edge tier ofimprove
                                 project,  the   same    community       of  developers      tried   to  use   this technology       to   the archi-the
                                 execution     of  Artificial  Intelligence     workloads       in  the   edge‐to‐cloud
                                tecture but maintaining the control plane (workload and edge devices management) in          continuum.       For  this
                                 purpose,
                                the  cloud ortheyin ahave   developed
                                                       centralized         Sedna, a project
                                                                       environment.                focusedOH
                                                                                          Furthermore,         on promises
                                                                                                                   implementing         collaborative
                                                                                                                                to manage     up to
                                 training
                                10,000     and
                                        edge      inference
                                               devices         capabilitiesfrom
                                                          simultaneously       across    the edge‐cloud
                                                                                     a single   Management    continuum      [70]. Open Horizon
                                                                                                                  Hub instance.
                                       Although
                                architecture         KubeEdge
                                                is divided    intois two
                                                                      the main
                                                                          main reference
                                                                                  components:  of the(1)second
                                                                                                         Managementcategory Hub:of approaches,
                                                                                                                                    located at the it is
                                 not  the only    such   framework      in  existence.     The  CNCF      accepted
                                centralized cloud in which a K8s distribution must be running. It oversees the controlas  sandbox      members     two
                                 more regarding
                                plane   projects: OpenYurt       [71] (the first
                                                      the deployments        and open‐source
                                                                                   the edge nodes   project
                                                                                                         and carried
                                                                                                               devices.out(2)by   the Chinese
                                                                                                                                Edge             giant
                                                                                                                                       Agent: this
                                 Alibaba) and SuperEdge [72] (whose realization is led by Tencent along with Intel,
                                 VMware, Huya, Cambricon, Captialonline, and Meituan). Both OpenYurt and SuperEdge
                                 are more focused on edge datacenters or relatively large edge devices due to their higher
                                 computational requirements as compared to KubeEdge. One of the most remarkable fea‐
                                 tures of OpenYurt is the integration with the EdgeX Foundry for edge device management
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                            14 of 27




                         component is divided into two subtypes depending on the workload type that will be run
                         by the node. The Edge Device Agent is targeted for resource-constrained devices which are
                         capable of running containerized workloads through a container runtime, while the Edge
                         Cluster Agent is appropriate for equipment in which a K8s distribution can be installed.
                         Open Horizon is also gaining popularity among the edge-native community, as the EVE-OS
                         developers (introduced in Section 5—both are official projects of the Linux Foundation)
                         are planning to support OH-based workloads (K8s pods are natively supported). Baetyl
                         is another project which shares some key concepts with KubeEdge and Open Horizon since
                         its architecture is split into: (1) the Cloud Management Suite and (2) the Edge Computing
                         Framework [75]. However, Baetyl only supports edge nodes with a minimum of 1 GB of
                         RAM that are capable of running a K8s distribution (K3s is recommended for resource-
                         constrained environments), not being yet capable of orchestrating container workloads by
                         itself. This tool is also included in stage 1 of Linux Foundation Edge, and thus it also seems
                         to be promising, although, at the moment of this review, it is in a preliminary stage with a
                         clear lack of documentation.
                               At the beginning of this section, it was explained that there are two major types of ap-
                         proaches for materializing container orchestration at the edge, both following the principles
                         and implementation of the cloud-native reference in the cloud: Kubernetes. However, there
                         also exist a few other frameworks that separate from the K8s standard but that also address
                         such orchestration. A representative example of these alternatives is ioFog, developed by
                         the Eclipse Foundation. This framework presents some similarities with Kubernetes, such
                         as the use of the iofogctl command and the specification of microservices using YAML files.
                         It also has commonalities with other edge-specific technologies mentioned in this section,
                         such as having an architecture based on deploying a controller in the cloud in charge
                         of the agents running in the edge devices, which in this case is named Edge Compute
                         Network [76].
                               After reviewing all these technologies, Table 1 has been created to illustrate the differ-
                         ences among the most relevant container orchestration tools for the edge, paying attention
                         to selected key aspects.
                               To conclude this section, the authors deem it interesting to refer to the Akri framework,
                         which is also under the CNCF umbrella, as a Sandbox project. Akri focuses on the develop-
                         ment of a Kubernetes Resource Interface that allows exposing a range of heterogeneous
                         leaf devices located at the lowest tier of the continuum as resources in a K8s cluster, for
                         instance, IP cameras or USB devices connected to the same machine that is a K8s node [77].
                         This is not a K8s lightweight distribution, nor does it aim at orchestrating containers at the
                         edge level of the architecture. It is only a component that complements an edge instance by
                         allowing the very end devices to be recognized from high-level management frameworks,
                         providing a layer of abstraction for the devices in a similar way the CNI does for the
                         network. This is the main difference between Akri and the technologies presented above
                         (KubeEdge, Open Horizon, . . .), and the reason why it is not included in Table 1. However, it
                         is relevant to be considered from the viewpoint of a deployment review of the cloud-native
                         approach on the edge. Technically, leaf devices interact with the Akri Agent service running
                         on the nearest K8s node of the cluster, and thus Akri extends the K8s functionalities but
                         does not adapt it to edge-native scenarios in contrast to, e.g., KubeEdge. Akri relies on a
                         set of device Discovery Handlers based on management and communication protocols for
                         industrial devices such as ONVIF, udev and OPC UA, as well as the possibility of extending
                         this set with custom handlers [78]. When a new device is discovered by the handlers, Akri
                         creates a K8s service to monitor its state and provide high availability in case a node loses
                         network connection or breaks down.
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                                                                                         15 of 27




                                  Table 1. Comparison of technologies for container orchestration at the edge.

                                                                           Edge Node        Edge Supported CPU                                            Responsible
     Technology          K8s Based          Edge Service Mesh                                                      Production-Stage Deployments                         Popularity
                                                                           Autonomy            Architectures                                               and Status
                                                                                                                  Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macao bridge
                                       Yes, completely decentralized                                                                                        CNCF        5.5k stars
      KubeEdge              Yes                                                Yes        x86_64, ARMv8, ARMv7   China Mobile’s industrial internet big
                                              with EdgeMesh                                                                                               Incubating    1.5k forks
                                                                                                                             data center
                                                                                                                  Hema Fresh’s customer goods store
                                                                                                                                                            CNCF        1.4k stars
      OpenYurt              Yes               Yes, using Raven                 Yes        x86_64, ARMv8, ARMv7     AI project Video cloud migration
                                                                                                                                                           Sandbox      298 forks
                                                                                                                           in transportation
                                                                                                                                                            CNCF        881 stars
     SuperEdge              Yes         Yes, through ServiceGroups             Yes             x86_64, ARMv8               Not documented
                                                                                                                                                           Sandbox      190 forks
                                                                                              x86_64, ARMv8,                  IBM Edge                     LF Edge       87 stars
   Open Horizon             Yes                      No                        No
                                                                                              ARMv7, ppc64le             Application Manager               Stage 2       62 forks
                                                                                                x86_64, i386,                                              LF Edge      1.8k stars
        Baetyl              Yes                      No                    Temporary                                       Not documented
                                                                                              ARMv8, ARMv7l                                                Stage 1      318 forks
                                                                                                                                                                         18 stars
    Project Flotta          Yes                      No                        No              x86_64, ARMv8               Not documented                  Red Hat
                                                                                                                                                                         21 forks
                                                                                                                                                            Eclipse      270 stars
    Eclipse ioFog           No                      Yes                        Yes        x86_64, ARMv8, ARMv7             Not documented
                                                                                                                                                          Foundation     34 forks
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                                                         16 of 27




                                7. Future Directions: The Horizon beyond Containers-Only
                                        Section 3 has concluded that nowadays, cloud-native implementations revolve around
                                  orchestrating workloads in the form of containers, taking advantage of container virtual-
                                  ization techniques. Undeniably, this is the current de facto standard. However, containers
                                  are far from being established as the final and definitive approach in a technological field
                                  where everything is in continuous change. In fact, it is already well-known that contain-
                                  ers are not perfect since they present some weaknesses (e.g., in security [79]) and have a
                                  reduced capacity for improvement over their current state. Regarding the utilization of
                                  containers in edge computing scenarios, although they are widely adopted at the moment
                                  (see Sections 5 and 6), they still have a downside in their required technological stack and
                                  in the large working memory footprint and container image sizes that they have. Therefore,
                                  other virtualization techniques that could compete with containers have appeared, becom-
                                  ing current trends in the deployment research field. According to works that compare
                                  containers, VMs and Unikernels [80], new paradigms are arising (see Figure 5). However,
                                  this does not necessarily mean that these technologies will substitute containers in the
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                                                                                                                           short
                                                                                                                         18 of 27
                                  term, but they can simply be seen as a powerful complement for containers, and either one
                                  or the other may be used in specific use cases and, most likely, together.




                         (a)                                         (b)                                                   (c)
                                Figure
                                Figure 5.
                                       5.Comparison
                                          Comparison ofof
                                                       thethe
                                                           architectures  of different
                                                               architectures           virtualization
                                                                              of different            techniques:
                                                                                           virtualization         (a) MicroVMs
                                                                                                          techniques:          light‐
                                                                                                                       (a) MicroVMs
                                weight VM; (b) Containers; (c) Unikernels.
                                lightweight VM; (b) Containers; (c) Unikernels.

                                      One   step ahead
                                      In Section            of MicroVMs
                                                    3, a short   review of and      Unikernels is
                                                                              the advantages       ofthe  most recent
                                                                                                      containers     versusandVMs most is promising
                                                                                                                                           presented.
                                trend
                                While in    workload
                                        those    argumentsvirtualization:    WebAssembly
                                                                 do hold true,     the isolation  (Wasm).     Wasmofisthe
                                                                                                     capabilities           “a latter
                                                                                                                                binary(dueinstruction
                                                                                                                                                to not
                                format
                                sharingforthestack‐based
                                               same kernel virtual  machines”
                                                                among            developed
                                                                         virtualized            as an
                                                                                        instances   butopen
                                                                                                         usingstandard       by theare
                                                                                                                 a hypervisor)        World      Wide
                                                                                                                                          interesting
                                Web   Consortium        (W3C),    that seeks   to establish   itself as  a strong    alternative
                                from an edge computing perspective. Separating the instances at a lower level may allow              to  containers.
                                Wasm    allows
                                for better         software
                                             security          to be
                                                         of user      written inas,
                                                                   workloads,       several  high‐level
                                                                                       in contrast   with languages
                                                                                                             containers,(C++,thereGo,wouldKotlin,
                                                                                                                                               not…) be
                                to be  compiled      and   executed    with   near‐native    performance        in
                                multi-tenant untrusted environments. Realizing the previous findings, a new approachweb    applications      that   are
                                designed
                                for workloadto run    in web browsers
                                                   virtualization     has [94,95].
                                                                           arisen, Still,  some
                                                                                     keeping       works
                                                                                                 the        havetrait
                                                                                                      isolation    beenwhile
                                                                                                                           conducted
                                                                                                                                   skippingfollowing
                                                                                                                                                 some
                                the  SPEC (Standard
                                inconveniences             Performance
                                                       of the  VMs. ThisEvaluation
                                                                              is reached Corporation)
                                                                                            by reducing benchmarks
                                                                                                              the size and and         have shown
                                                                                                                                  requirements       of
                                an
                                VMs,underperformance
                                       achieving the so-calledof Wasm     as compared
                                                                      microVMs             with native
                                                                                     or lightweight     VMscode   byintend
                                                                                                               that   a factor  toofbe1.45
                                                                                                                                        evenfor   Fire‐
                                                                                                                                               lighter
                                fox
                                andand     1.55than
                                      faster     for containers.
                                                       Chrome [96].However,
                                                                        This technology
                                                                                    no clearwas     first to
                                                                                                results   designed
                                                                                                              date wouldto enhance       the perfor‐
                                                                                                                                demonstrate        this
                                mance
                                reliably.ofSome
                                            demanding
                                                   works [81]applications    that perform
                                                                 have compared                poorly when
                                                                                     the performance            written in
                                                                                                           of container        JavaScript
                                                                                                                            (runC)            instead
                                                                                                                                     and microVM
                                of languages
                                (Kata  Container)specifically
                                                        runtimes,tailored
                                                                    showing for its working
                                                                                better          purpose.ofAt
                                                                                         performance            a high
                                                                                                              the  former.level,   the functioning
                                                                                                                              It was    argued that
                                of Wasm
                                this        is simple: native
                                      underperformance             code be
                                                                 might    functions
                                                                              causedare by compiled
                                                                                            the longer  into   Wasm
                                                                                                            boot   times modules      that then
                                                                                                                             of microVMs            ares
                                                                                                                                                 (3.7
                                on average),
                                loaded   and used as compared
                                                        by a web to    containers(in
                                                                    application       (0.633  s on average).
                                                                                         JavaScript    code) in aThe     microVM
                                                                                                                     similar     way to  technology
                                                                                                                                            how ES6
                                utilized for
                                modules     arethe   comparison
                                                 managed.            (Kata
                                                               Related       Containers)
                                                                         to these           is an
                                                                                    pre‐built      OpenStack
                                                                                               modules,            tool whose
                                                                                                             the work    of [97] hasmain    goal is to
                                                                                                                                         researched
                                runpossibility
                                the  lighter VMs    of instead   of containers
                                                        using them     as a newer  while   remaining
                                                                                      obfuscation        compliant
                                                                                                      technique     for with     the OCI
                                                                                                                         inserting           runtime
                                                                                                                                       malware      in‐
                                side web applications, making it harder to detect by malware analyzers. This drawback
                                can be seen as an example of the new risks that groundbreaking technologies always bring
                                with them.
                                      In recent times, developers have attempted to move Wasm outside web browsers, or,
                                in other words, from the (web) client side to the server side for a standalone mode of
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                         17 of 27




                         and image specifications (see Section 5). By sticking to OCI, Kata allows Docker images
                         previously built from Dockerfiles to be deployed as microVMs (Kata containers) [82]. This
                         underperformance has been addressed through the development of a lighter container
                         runtime oriented to running microVM-based workloads, but also OCI-compliant: RunD,
                         especially focused on solving the bottleneck in serverless function deployments. RunD has
                         been adopted by Alibaba as its serverless container runtime, serving more than 1 million
                         functions and almost 4 billion invocations daily. Furthermore, RunD has been able to start
                         200 lightweight VMs in a second and to successfully deploy 2500 of them in a machine with
                         384 GB of memory [83].
                               Another approach to replace or complement containers with microVMs are Uniker-
                         nels. According to [84], “Unikernels are single-purpose appliances that are compile-time
                         specialized into standalone kernels and sealed against modification when deployed to a
                         cloud platform”. The main idea beyond Unikernels is to use only the strictly necessary
                         part of the user and kernel space of an operating system to obtain a customized OS that
                         will be run by a type 1 hypervisor. Such customized OS is achieved through the usage
                         of a library operating system (library OS or libOS), removing the need for a whole guest
                         OS [85]. This is translated into a reduction of image size and their booting time, as well
                         as their footprint and possible attack surface. However, this virtualization technology has
                         many disadvantages, the most prominent being the lack of standardization as compared
                         with containers, in addition to the need of a complete library operating system rebuild for
                         every new application with any minimal changes, followed by the limitation of debugging
                         and monitoring capabilities [86]. Unikernel applications are also language-specific (there
                         are Unikernel development systems only for a few languages), being also a considerable
                         limitation for developers. As an example, MirageOS is a library OS that builds Unikernels
                         using the OCaml language together with libraries that provide networking, storage and
                         concurrency support [87]. Nabla containers is an IBM research project focused on building
                         a platform to handle Unikernel workloads (for instance, workloads built using MirageOS)
                         through the usage of its own low-level container runtime runnc [88,89]. While runnc is
                         OCI-compliant, Nabla’s image specification is not, thus, software packaged with container
                         image specifications other than Nabla’s one is not supported by this technology. In addition,
                         unfortunately, the Nabla project seems to be in a frozen state. Notwithstanding, newer
                         approaches to Unikernels have emerged with the aim of making this paradigm a reasonable
                         option with better integration in the cloud-native virtualization environment. Unikraft
                         is a Linux-based “automated system for building Unikernels” under the umbrella of the
                         Linux Foundation (inside its Xen Project) and partially funded by the EU H2020 project
                         UNICORE [90]. While other similar initiatives exist, such as Lupine, Unikraft presents an
                         improved performance in comparison to its peers and other virtualization technologies,
                         such as Docker (regarding boot time, image size, and memory consumption). Unikraft
                         leverages an OCI-compliant runtime (runu) along with libvirt (a toolkit for interacting with
                         the hypervisor) for running Unikernels. The novelty is that runu natively supports the
                         execution of workloads previously packaged following the OCI Image Specification (unlike
                         Nabla), enabling Unikraft-built Unikernels’ interaction with containers and cloud-native
                         platforms like K8s [91,92]. However, this promising Unikernel approach is still in a pre-
                         liminary stage and is yet to cope with some challenges regarding, for instance: (1) the
                         improvement of Unikernel applications packaging as OCI images and (2) the distribution of
                         those images in OCI registries (e.g., the support of images for different CPU architectures).
                         Furthermore, the source code of runu has not been delivered yet due to its instability and it
                         being in a continuous improvement stage [93].
                               One step ahead of MicroVMs and Unikernels is the most recent and most promising
                         trend in workload virtualization: WebAssembly (Wasm). Wasm is “a binary instruction
                         format for stack-based virtual machines” developed as an open standard by the World Wide
                         Web Consortium (W3C), that seeks to establish itself as a strong alternative to containers.
                         Wasm allows software to be written in several high-level languages (C++, Go, Kotlin, . . .)
                         to be compiled and executed with near-native performance in web applications that are
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                                                          18 of 27




                                     designed to run in web browsers [94,95]. Still, some works have been conducted following
                                     the SPEC (Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation) benchmarks and have shown an
                                     underperformance of Wasm as compared with native code by a factor of 1.45 for Firefox
                                     and 1.55 for Chrome [96]. This technology was first designed to enhance the performance
                                     of demanding applications that perform poorly when written in JavaScript instead of
                                     languages specifically tailored for its working purpose. At a high level, the functioning
                                     of Wasm is simple: native code functions are compiled into Wasm modules that then are
                                     loaded and used by a web application (in JavaScript code) in a similar way to how ES6
                                     modules are managed. Related to these pre-built modules, the work of [97] has researched
                                     the possibility of using them as a newer obfuscation technique for inserting malware inside
                                     web applications, making it harder to detect by malware analyzers. This drawback can
                                     be seen as an example of the new risks that groundbreaking technologies always bring
                                     with them.
                                            In recent times, developers have attempted to move Wasm outside web browsers,
                                     or, in other words, from the (web) client side to the server side for a standalone mode of
                                     operation. Wasm binaries’ tiny size, low memory footprint, great isolation, fast booting
                                     (up to 100 times faster than containers), and response times make Wasm perfect for running
                                     workloads in edge and IoT devices. Adopting Wasm in edge environments (where resource-
                                     constrained nodes struggle to run container workloads) could lead to an increased number
                                     of simultaneously running services as compared with the current container throughput in
                                     the same environment [98,99]. Digging deeper into Wasm functioning, it is worth noting
                                     that when a Wasm binary is executed in the web browser, it uses the web APIs provided by
                                     the browser to interact with the required external components through appropriate system
                                     calls. However, when engineers started trying to run Wasm modules outside the web
                                     framework, an equivalent of such an API did not exist. It was required to establish such a
                                     “bridge” software to enable the interaction between a Wasm module and the host operating
   Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                                     system calls. Thus, efforts were focused on delivering a standard set of APIs19                           of 27
                                                                                                                                            prepared   to
                                     facilitate standalone Wasm module deployment. This was done while upholding two main
                                     Wasm principles: portability, which means being able to run the same code across different
                                      able to run
                                     systems,    and the   same code
                                                        security.   Thisacross   different
                                                                          research    led tosystems,   and of
                                                                                             the creation  security.   This researchSystem
                                                                                                              the WebAssembly            led to the
                                                                                                                                                Interface
                                      creation aof“modular
                                     (WASI),         the WebAssembly         System for
                                                                  system interface      Interface (WASI), a “modular
                                                                                            WebAssembly”      with the main system   interface
                                                                                                                                  purpose        for
                                                                                                                                             of enabling
                                      WebAssembly”
                                     the   execution ofwith    Wasmthe main
                                                                       on the purpose
                                                                                 serverofside
                                                                                            enabling
                                                                                                throughthe execution
                                                                                                           the creation of Wasm     on the server
                                                                                                                             and standardization       of
                                      side  through      the   creation and   standardization     of  APIs. Realizing
                                     APIs. Realizing the above-mentioned security concerns, WASI was carefully designed tothe above‐mentioned
                                      security concerns,
                                     minimize      the attack   WASI   was carefully
                                                                   surface   and prevent designed   to minimize
                                                                                               malicious   Wasmthe      attack surface
                                                                                                                    modules               and pre‐
                                                                                                                                 from compromising
                                      vent  malicious      Wasm     modules    from   compromising     the host  system.
                                     the host system. Furthermore, WASI was designed to be independent of the used          Furthermore,     WASIWasm
                                     runtime (the component in charge of running Wasm modules or applications, itofcan be
                                      was   designed      to be  independent     of  the used  Wasm    runtime   (the  component      in charge
                                      running Wasm modules or applications, it can be feasibly compared with the low‐level
                                     feasibly   compared with the low-level container runtimes in terms of functionalities as both
                                      container runtimes in terms of functionalities as both are the components that actually run
                                     are the components that actually run the workloads) [100,101]. Wasm modules make WASI
                                      the workloads) [100,101]. Wasm modules make WASI calls to a Wasm runtime that are
                                     calls to a Wasm runtime that are then translated into the appropriate system calls to finally
                                      then translated into the appropriate system calls to finally interact with the OS kernel
                                     interact with the OS kernel [102], as depicted in Figure 6. Nowadays, WASI is still in the
                                      [102], as depicted in Figure 6. Nowadays, WASI is still in the process of being standard‐
                                     process    of beingby
                                      ized, promoted          standardized,
                                                                a subgroup ofpromoted         by a subgroup
                                                                                  the WebAssembly              of theGroup
                                                                                                        Community       WebAssembly         Community
                                                                                                                                of W3C through
                                     Group     of  W3C       through    a  set  of  standardization     proposals     (HTTP,
                                      a set of standardization proposals (HTTP, filesystem, machine learning, …). The proposals  filesystem,    machine
                                     learning,
                                      are grouped into 5 phases of development following the Phase Process of the aforemen‐Phase
                                                 . . .).  The   proposals   are  grouped     into 5 phases  of development        following    the
                                     Process    of the aforementioned
                                      tioned community          group. Currently,community      group. proposals
                                                                                      the most mature    Currently,are  the
                                                                                                                          in most
                                                                                                                             phasemature
                                                                                                                                     2, whichproposals
                                                                                                                                                can
                                     are  in phase     2,  which    can be   seen   as another   indicator
                                      be seen as another indicator of this technology’s novelty [103].      of  this  technology’s      novelty [103].




                                     Figure 6. Architecture
                                     Figure    Architecturefor
                                                            forrunning
                                                                runningWebAssembly
                                                                        WebAssemblyworkloads on the
                                                                                     workloads   on server side.side.
                                                                                                    the server

                                           Naturally, WebAssembly runtimes are an essential element of the Wasm stack, since,
                                      at the end of the day, the execution of Wasm modules relies on them. In recent years,
                                      several Wasm runtimes have been developed that move the execution of Wasm work‐
                                      loads outside the browser. Interestingly, most of them have realized the potential in the
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                           19 of 27




                               Naturally, WebAssembly runtimes are an essential element of the Wasm stack, since, at
                         the end of the day, the execution of Wasm modules relies on them. In recent years, several
                         Wasm runtimes have been developed that move the execution of Wasm workloads outside
                         the browser. Interestingly, most of them have realized the potential in the edge-cloud
                         continuum field, as they are specifically adapted to work in edge computing scenarios.
                         These runtimes differ from each other in the supported WASI specifications and in the
                         providence of programming SDK or implementation APIs to let developers load Wasm
                         modules in the source code of their applications, among other aspects. An interesting,
                         identified feature is that some runtimes (Wasmer [104], Wasmtime [105] and WasmEdge [106])
                         are natively supported in the low-level container runtime crun to achieve integration
                         with containerized workloads, a trend that will be explained in detail later. For a better
                         understanding of the differences among the existing runtimes, and with the final purpose
                         of becoming a helpful resource for developers, Table 2 has been created, which compares
                         carefully selected Wasm runtimes.
                               Apart from the industry, some works related to Wasm runtimes are being conducted
                         in the research world. In [102] is presented Wasmachine, an OS that tries to move the WASI
                         specification to its kernel written in Rust (the benefits of Rust compared to C have already
                         been discussed in Section 5), so it can avoid the overload of the system calls introduced
                         by the Wasm runtime in order to achieve a faster performance compared to native code
                         directly executed on Linux. The results presented in this paper show an increase in the
                         execution speed of 21%. On another note, Twine is a Wasm runtime resulting from the
                         interaction between the industry and the H2020 research project VEDLIoT due to the
                         fact that it is based on WAMR (see Table 2) but more focused on embedded and trusted
                         environments [107].
                               The hype about this technology is such that Docker cofounder Solomon Hykes stated
                         in 2019, that if Wasm along with WASI had existed in 2008, they would not have needed
                         to create Docker [108]. However, this does not mean that these two types of workloads
                         are incompatible or that one technology is expected to replace the other in the future; both
                         can be combined, and the choice of the working technology should be made depending
                         on the final business use case. For instance, containers are a better fit for strong filesystem
                         control and intensive I/O operations, while Wasm is better for setting up simple web
                         servers [109]. In addition, Docker has recently announced the compatibility of the Docker
                         Engine with Wasm through the usage of WasmEdge as its Wasm runtime for running such
                         specific workloads. However, to do so, the developers must ensure that the Wasm modules
                         are packaged as OCI-compliant images [110], so that the high-level runtime of the Docker
                         Engine (containerd) can properly cope with the workload through the specifically created
                         containerd-wasm-shim. Native compatibility is completed as this shim interacts with the
                         WasmEdge Wasm runtime to run a Wasm application in the same way as it would interact
                         with the low-level container runtime runC to run a container (as illustrated in Figure 7).
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                                                                                        20 of 27




                                 Table 2. Comparison of Wasm runtimes.

                     Language                                Supported Languages for           Supported CPU            Production-Stage Runtime
   Technology                            WASI                                                                                                            Responsible    Popularity
                      Written                                 Workload Embedding                Architectures                Deployments
                                                            C, C++, C#, Crystal, D, Dart,
                                                             Go, Java, JavaScript, PHP,                                                                                 14.1k stars
     Wasmer              Rust             Yes                                                  x86_64, ARMv8                crun, Fluence Labs           Wasmer Inc.
                                                             Postgres, Python, R, Ruby,                                                                                  607 forks
                                                                   Rust, OCaml
                                                                                                                       crun, Shopify, Fastly, DFINITY,
                                                              Bash, C, C++, Go, .NET,                                                                     Bytecode      11.1k stars
   Wasmtime              Rust             Yes                                                  x86_64, ARMv8            InfinityOn, Fermyon, Mebark,
                                                                Python, Ruby, Rust                                                                        Alliance       882 forks
                                                                                                                     SingleStore, Microsoft, wasmCloud
                                                                Arduino, C, C++, Go,        x86_64, x86_32, ARMv8,
                                                                                                                                                            CNCF        5.7k stars
     Wasm3                C               Yes                 JavaScript, Perl, Python,        ARMv7, RISC-V,              Shareup, wasmCloud
                                                                                                                                                           Sandbox      367 forks
                                                               .NET, Nim, Swift, Zig         XTENSA, MIPS, ARC
                                  Yes: Sockets, Crypto,
                                                                                                                      crun, Docker Engine, Suborbital       CNCF        4.9k stars
   WasmEdge               C++      Machine learning         C, Go, Node.js, Python, Rust       x86_64, ARMv8
                                                                                                                           scheduler and engine            Sandbox      446 forks
                                 (wasi-nn), proxy-wasm
                                                                                            x86_64, x86_32, ARMv8,
                                                                                                                                                          Bytecode      3.3k stars
     WAMR                 C               Yes                   C, C++, Go, Python             ARMv7, RISC-V,                Not documented
                                                                                                                                                          Alliance      429 forks
                                                                                             XTENSA, MIPS, ARC
                                                                                               x86_64, ARMv8,                                                           2.4k stars
     wazero               Go              Yes                             Go                                                 Not documented              Tetrate Labs
                                                                                             RISC-V64 interpreter                                                       129 forks
                                                                                                                                                            CNCF        2.3k stars
     WAVM                C/C++            Yes                            C, C++                    x86_64                    Not documented
                                                                                                                                                           Sandbox      214 forks
                                                                                                                                                            Parity       1k stars
      wasmi              Rust             Yes                             Rust                 Not documented              Substrate blockchain
                                                                                                                                                         Technologies   198 forks
                          ules are packaged as OCI‐compliant images [110], so that the high‐level runtime of the
                          Docker Engine (containerd) can properly cope with the workload through the specifically
                          created containerd‐wasm‐shim. Native compatibility is completed as this shim interacts with
                          the WasmEdge Wasm runtime to run a Wasm application in the same way as it would
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                       21 of 27in
                          interact with the low‐level container runtime runC to run a container (as illustrated
                          Figure 7).




                          Figure 7. Docker Engine architecture for running Wasm workloads [110].
                         Figure 7. Docker Engine architecture for running Wasm workloads [110].

                                 Thecoexistence
                               The    coexistenceofofdifferent
                                                        differenttypes
                                                                     typesofofworkloads
                                                                                 workloadsputs   putsinto
                                                                                                        intothe
                                                                                                              thescene
                                                                                                                   scenethetherequirement
                                                                                                                                requirement
                         of a common orchestration mechanism. In Section 6, multiple technologies havebeen
                           of a common     orchestration     mechanism.        In Section     6, multiple    technologies     have     been re‐
                           viewed    to prove  that   K8s   is  being    increasingly     adapted     and
                         reviewed to prove that K8s is being increasingly adapted and successfully used as asuccessfully     used   as  a con‐
                           tainer orchestration
                         container   orchestrationframework
                                                     framework     forfor
                                                                        thetheedge.
                                                                                edge.TheThelast  part
                                                                                              last partofof
                                                                                                          this  review
                                                                                                             this  review article focuses
                                                                                                                            article focuses on
                         onanalyzing
                             analyzing  whether
                                          whetherthis   powerful
                                                     this  powerful  framework
                                                                          framework  (K8s)    could
                                                                                          (K8s)       alsoalso
                                                                                                  could     be used   to orchestrate
                                                                                                                 be used                 other
                                                                                                                            to orchestrate
                           typestypes
                         other    of workloads     on the
                                        of workloads          edge.
                                                         on the   edge.Observing
                                                                            Observing the the
                                                                                           general
                                                                                                generalarchitecture
                                                                                                          architecture of Kubernetes,
                                                                                                                           of Kubernetes,  the
                           kubelet  component    interacts     with    a  high‐level
                         the kubelet component interacts with a high-level container    container     runtime     (also  referred   to  as
                                                                                                                  (also referred to as the the
                           CRIruntime
                         CRI    runtimeororCRICRIimplementation
                                                   implementationininK8s)      K8s)that
                                                                                      thatimplements
                                                                                             implementsthe    theKubernetes
                                                                                                                    KubernetesContainer
                                                                                                                                   Container
                           Runtime
                         Runtime      Interface
                                    Interface   (CRI)
                                              (CRI)      acting
                                                      acting   as as  a gRPC
                                                                  a gRPC      APIAPI   client
                                                                                   client  forfor   launching
                                                                                                launching     podspods
                                                                                                                     andand
                                                                                                                          theirtheir contain‐
                                                                                                                                 containers.
                           ers. Looking
                         Looking    deeperdeeper   into
                                            into K8s      K8s functioning,
                                                       functioning,               a resource
                                                                         a resource               named Runtime
                                                                                       named Runtime                   Class
                                                                                                            Class is the   keyisunderlying
                                                                                                                                 the key un‐
                           derlying component.
                         component.     This class isThis   class isfor
                                                       “a feature      “aselecting
                                                                            feature fortheselecting
                                                                                           containerthe      container
                                                                                                         runtime          runtime configu‐
                                                                                                                    configuration”     [111],
                           ration”
                         which   can[111],  which can
                                      be leveraged     forbe   leveraged
                                                           mapping            for mapping
                                                                          different   workload   different   workload
                                                                                                     types with     their types   with their
                                                                                                                           corresponding
                         low-level   runtimelow‐level
                           corresponding      (same architectural
                                                          runtime (same   spotarchitectural
                                                                                as the low-level spotruntime     in Figureruntime
                                                                                                       as the low‐level      1). Therefore,
                                                                                                                                       in Fig‐
                         the
                           ureinstalled  high-level
                                1). Therefore,  the container       runtime incontainer
                                                      installed high‐level         the cluster,             in the CRI-O
                                                                                                   for instance,
                                                                                                 runtime                         containerd
                                                                                                                     cluster,orfor  instance,
                         (see Section 5), will be able to send a request to the proper low-level runtime in order
                         to actually run the requested workload, as shown in Figure 8. The only requirement
                         is packaging the application into an OCI-compliant image previously stored in an OCI-
                         compliant image registry (same pre-condition as for the Docker engine).
                               Paying particular attention to Wasm module workloads in the K8s environment,
                         Krustlet is an experimental project based on the rewrite of the kubelet component using
                         the Rust language to run natively Wasm-based workloads. Krustlet relies on the use
                         of K8s tolerations for scheduling such workloads to be deployed on K8s nodes, where
                         the Wasmtime Wasm runtime had been previously installed [112]. As a final note, the
                         relationship between K8s and Wasm modules is not limited to the deployment of Wasm
                         applications instead of containers. Innovative studies like the one presented in [113]
                         propose to reduce the K8s control plane overhead, one of the principal reasons for K8s’s
                         heavy size, through the deployment of Wasm-based K8s operators (modules that extend
                         K8s API features) on demand. In that work, the replacement of traditional container-based
                         controllers with Wasm-based ones showed a reduced memory consumption of about 64%.
 Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                   22 of 27




                                  CRI‐O or containerd (see Section 5), will be able to send a request to the proper low‐level
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215            runtime in order to actually run the requested workload, as shown in Figure 8. The22onlyof 27
                                  requirement is packaging the application into an OCI‐compliant image previously stored
                                  in an OCI‐compliant image registry (same pre‐condition as for the Docker engine).




                                  Figure8.8.Running
                                 Figure     Running different
                                                    different types
                                                               types of
                                                                     of workloads
                                                                        workloads in
                                                                                  in K8s.
                                                                                     K8s.

                                        Paying particular attention to Wasm module workloads in the K8s environment,
                                 8. Conclusions
                                  Krustlet is an experimental project based on the rewrite of the kubelet component using the
                                       The cloud computing paradigm has proven a great success in the last few years,
                                  Rust language to run natively Wasm‐based workloads. Krustlet relies on the use of K8s
                                 while, nowadays, edge computing challenges to replicate the advantageous traits posed by
                                  tolerations for scheduling such workloads to be deployed on K8s nodes, where the
                                 cloud (such as virtualization of workloads), moving them closer to the local action. In this
                                  Wasmtime Wasm runtime had been previously installed [112]. As a final note, the relation‐
                                 regard, several initiatives have been analyzed, focusing on those related to the container
                                  ship between K8s and Wasm modules is not limited to the deployment of Wasm applica‐
                                 virtualization mechanism. Among the most relevant findings, novel runtimes exist that
                                  tions instead of containers. Innovative studies like the one presented in [113] propose to
                                 evolve Docker Engine (current de facto standard), such as crun and CRI-O, as well as
                                  reduce the K8s control plane overhead, one of the principal reasons for K8s’s heavy size,
                                 specific operating systems such as EVE-OS, BalenaOS or Pantacor.
                                  through the deployment of Wasm‐based K8s operators (modules that extend K8s API fea‐
                                       The most relevant challenge lies in the orchestration of such workloads considering
                                  tures) on demand. In that work, the replacement of traditional container‐based controllers
                                 the heterogeneity of computing equipment present in edge scenarios. A strong research
                                  with Wasm‐based ones showed a reduced memory consumption of about 64%.
                                 line is the creation of lightweight versions of Kubernetes, which is a very popular tool in the
                                 cloud. Solutions to the like of K3s or MicroK8s are the current blueprints for this approach
                                  8. Conclusions
                                 that can be used in combination and need a centralized Kubernetes deployment resulting in
                                        The cloudNonetheless,
                                 multi-clusters.      computing paradigm           has proven
                                                                     another approach             a great
                                                                                             is also        success
                                                                                                      gaining          in thewhich
                                                                                                               popularity      last few   years,
                                                                                                                                      advocates
                                  while,  nowadays,     edge     computing     challenges    to replicate   the  advantageous
                                 for adapting the K8s architecture to the edge requirements instead of just reducing K8s          traits  posed
                                  by cloud (such
                                 components’         as virtualization
                                                  size  and footprint.ofThe    workloads),    moving them
                                                                                   most promising        here closer    to the local
                                                                                                               is KubeEdge,     which action.  In
                                                                                                                                         already
                                  this  regard,  several  initiatives    have   been   analyzed,    focusing   on   those
                                 presents several successful large-scale trials and has been officially accepted under the related  to the  con‐
                                  tainer virtualization
                                 umbrella    of the CNCF   mechanism.       Amongproject.
                                                              as an Incubating        the most relevant findings, novel runtimes exist
                                  that Nonetheless,
                                        evolve Dockercontainers
                                                         Engine (current       de  facto
                                                                       do present certain standard),    such as crun
                                                                                               disadvantages      that and   CRI‐O,
                                                                                                                        are even     as well asin
                                                                                                                                   worsened
                                  specific
                                 edge       operating systems
                                        environments,     such assuchlargeasimage
                                                                              EVE‐OS,size,BalenaOS
                                                                                           non-robust  or Pantacor.
                                                                                                          security, and low isolation in the
                                 case of multi-tenant applications, among others. Because ofofthis,
                                        The  most   relevant    challenge    lies in the  orchestration       such    workloads
                                                                                                                   novel  ways ofconsidering
                                                                                                                                    virtualizing
                                  the  heterogeneity    of  computing      equipment      present    in edge  scenarios.
                                 workloads have emerged that are of special relevance for achieving edge-native             A strongprinciples.
                                                                                                                                       research
                                  line is the creation   of  lightweight     versions   of  Kubernetes,    which
                                 The most important trend for the future of cloud-native workload execution at the  is a very  popular   tool  in
                                                                                                                                            edge
                                  the  cloud.  Solutions   to   the like  of  K3s  or MicroK8s     are  the current
                                 is the use of WebAssembly modules. Wasm’s benefits perfectly suit edge computing      blueprints  for  this  ap‐
                                  proachand
                                 needs,    thatseveral
                                                 can be initiatives
                                                          used in combination         and need
                                                                       and open projects          a centralized
                                                                                                have   been reviewedKubernetes
                                                                                                                          in this deployment
                                                                                                                                  contribution
                                  resulting   in  multi‐clusters.     Nonetheless,      another    approach     is  also
                                 concluding that this approach is envisioned as the frontrunner for the next generation   gaining   popularityof
                                  which advocates
                                 edge-cloud            for adapting
                                               continuum                the becoming
                                                               scenarios,   K8s architecture
                                                                                         a strongto alternative
                                                                                                     the edge requirements
                                                                                                                   to containersinstead
                                                                                                                                  ratherof   justa
                                                                                                                                           than
                                  reducing   K8s  components’       size and   footprint.  The   most   promising    here
                                 full replacement of them. This emergence of novel workloads has highlighted the need for  is KubeEdge,   which
                                 a common orchestration mechanism, so some initiatives have been conducted under the
                                 umbrella of Kubernetes.
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                                              23 of 27




                                 Author Contributions: Conceptualization, I.L. and R.V.; methodology, I.L.; formal analysis, R.V.;
                                 investigation, R.V. and R.S.-J.; writing—original draft preparation, R.V. and I.L.; writing—review
                                 and editing, I.L., R.S.-J. and P.S.; visualization, R.V.; supervision, C.E.P.; project administration, I.L.
                                 and C.E.P.; funding acquisition, C.E.P. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
                                 the manuscript.
                                 Funding: This research was funded by the European Commission under the Horizon Europe project
                                 aerOS, grant number 101069732.
                                 Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                 Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                 Data Availability Statement: No data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is not
                                 applicable to this article.
                                 Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
                                 of the study; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.

References
1.    Shi, W.; Cao, J.; Zhang, Q.; Li, Y.; Xu, L. Edge Computing: Vision and Challenges. IEEE Internet Things J. 2016, 3, 637–646.
      [CrossRef]
2.    Cao, K.; Liu, Y.; Meng, G.; Sun, Q. An Overview on Edge Computing Research. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 85714–85728. [CrossRef]
3.    Satyanarayanan, M.; Klas, G.; Silva, M.; Mangiante, S. The Seminal Role of Edge-Native Applications. In Proceedings of the 2019
      IEEE International Conference on Edge Computing, EDGE 2019—Part of the 2019 IEEE World Congress on Services, Milan, Italy,
      1 July 2019; Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.: Milan, Italy, 2019; pp. 33–40.
4.    Raj, P.; Vanga, S.; Chaudhary, A. Delineating Cloud-Native Edge Computing. In Cloud-Native Computing: How to Design, Develop,
      and Secure Microservices and Event-Driven Applications; Wiley-IEEE Press: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2023; pp. 171–201.
5.    LF Edge Projects. Available online: https://www.lfedge.org/projects/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
6.    The Eclipse Foundation: Edge Native Working Group. Available online: https://edgenative.eclipse.org/ (accessed on
      9 January 2023).
7.    CNCF Cloud Native Landscape. Available online: https://landscape.cncf.io/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
8.    Shaping Europe’s Digital Future: IoT and the Future of Edge Computing in Europe. Available online: https://digital-strategy.ec.
      europa.eu/en/news/iot-and-future-edge-computing-europe (accessed on 9 January 2023).
9.    European Comission Funding & Tender Opportunities: “Future European Platforms for the Edge: Meta Operating Systems
      (RIA)”. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic-details/
      horizon-cl4-2021-data-01-05 (accessed on 9 January 2023).
10.   European Comission Funding & Tender Opportunities: “Cognitive Cloud: AI-Enabled Computing Continuum from Cloud to
      Edge (RIA)”. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic-
      details/horizon-cl4-2022-data-01-02 (accessed on 9 January 2023).
11.   EUCloudEdgeIOT: Building the European Cloud Edge IoT Continuum for Business and Research. Available online: https:
      //eucloudedgeiot.eu/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
12.   ASSIST-IoT EU H2020 Project: Architecture for Scalable, Self-*, Human-Centric, Intelligent, Secure, and Tactile next Generation
      IoT. Available online: https://assist-iot.eu/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
13.   aerOS EU HE Project: Autonomous, ScalablE, TRustworthy, Intelligent European Meta Operating System for the IoT Edge-Cloud
      Continuum. Available online: https://aeros-project.eu/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
14.   Khan, W.Z.; Ahmed, E.; Hakak, S.; Yaqoob, I.; Ahmed, A. Edge Computing: A Survey. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 2019, 97,
      219–235. [CrossRef]
15.   Zeyu, H.; Geming, X.; Zhaohang, W.; Sen, Y. Survey on Edge Computing Security. In Proceedings of the 2020 International
      Conference on Big Data, Artificial Intelligence and Internet of Things Engineering, ICBAIE, Fuzhou, China, 12–14 June 2020;
      pp. 96–105. [CrossRef]
16.   Duan, Q.; Wang, S.; Ansari, N. Convergence of Networking and Cloud/Edge Computing: Status, Challenges, and Opportunities.
      IEEE Netw. 2020, 34, 148–155. [CrossRef]
17.   Xu, M.; Zhou, Q.; Wu, H.; Lin, W.; Ye, K.; Xu, C. PDMA: Probabilistic Service Migration Approach for Delay-Aware and
      Mobility-Aware Mobile Edge Computing. Softw. Pract. Exp. 2022, 52, 394–414. [CrossRef]
18.   Chen, M.; Liu, W.; Wang, T.; Zhang, S.; Liu, A. A Game-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach for Energy-Efficient
      Computation in MEC Systems. Knowl. Based Syst. 2022, 235, 107660. [CrossRef]
19.   Zhong, Z.; Alejandra Rodriguez, M.; Rodriguez, A.; Buyya, R.; Xu, M.; Xu, C.; Buyya, R. Machine Learning-Based Orchestration
      of Containers: A Taxonomy and Future Directions. ACM Comput. Surv. 2022, 54, 1–35. [CrossRef]
20.   Morabito, R.; Farris, I.; Iera, A.; Taleb, T. Evaluating Performance of Containerized IoT Services for Clustered Devices at the
      Network Edge. IEEE Internet Things J. 2017, 4, 1019–1030. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                                            24 of 27




21.   Al-Doghman, F.; Moustafa, N.; Khalil, I.; Tari, Z.; Zomaya, A. AI-Enabled Secure Microservices in Edge Computing: Opportunities
      and Challenges. In IEEE Transactions on Services Computing; IEEE: Piscataway, NL, USA, 2022. [CrossRef]
22.   Kong, X.; Wu, Y.; Wang, H.; Xia, F. Edge Computing for Internet of Everything: A Survey. IEEE Internet Things J. 2022, 9,
      23472–23485. [CrossRef]
23.   Malhotra, L.; Agarwal, D.; Jaiswal, A. Virtualization in Cloud Computing. J. Inf. Technol. Softw. Eng. 2014, 4, 1–3. [CrossRef]
24.   Bhardwaj, A.; Krishna, C.R. Virtualization in Cloud Computing: Moving from Hypervisor to Containerization—A Survey. Arab. J.
      Sci. Eng. 2021, 46, 8585–8601. [CrossRef]
25.   OpenFaaS: Serverless Functions Made Simple. Available online: https://www.openfaas.com/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
26.   Knative: An Open-Source Enterprise-Level Solution to Build Serverless and Event Driven Applications. Available online:
      https://knative.dev/docs/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
27.   CloudEvents: A Specification for Describing Event Data in a Common Way. Available online: https://cloudevents.io/
      (accessed on 9 January 2023).
28.   Maenhaut, P.J.; Volckaert, B.; Ongenae, V.; de Turck, F. Resource Management in a Containerized Cloud: Status and Challenges.
      J. Netw. Syst. Manag. 2020, 28, 197–246. [CrossRef]
29.   Yadav, A.K.; Garg, M.L. Ritika Docker Containers versus Virtual Machine-Based Virtualization. Adv. Intell. Syst. Comput. 2019,
      814, 141–150. [CrossRef]
30.   Canonical Ltd. Linux Containers: LXC. Available online: https://linuxcontainers.org/lxc/introduction/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
31.   Bernstein, D. Containers and Cloud: From LXC to Docker to Kubernetes. IEEE Cloud Comput. 2014, 1, 81–84. [CrossRef]
32.   Duan, Q. Intelligent and Autonomous Management in Cloud-Native Future Networks—A Survey on Related Standards from an
      Architectural Perspective. Future Internet 2021, 13, 42. [CrossRef]
33.   Alonso, J.; Orue-Echevarria, L.; Casola, V.; Torre, A.I.; Huarte, M.; Osaba, E.; Lobo, J.L. Understanding the Challenges and Novel
      Architectural Models of Multi-Cloud Native Applications—A Systematic Literature Review. J. Cloud Comput. 2023, 12, 1–34.
      [CrossRef]
34.   AWS IoT Greengrass. Available online: https://aws.amazon.com/greengrass/features/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
35.   What Is AWS Snowball Edge?—AWS Snowball Edge Developer Guide. Available online: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/
      snowball/latest/developer-guide/whatisedge.html (accessed on 9 January 2023).
36.   Microsoft Azure IoT Edge. Available online: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/iot-edge/#iotedge-overview
      (accessed on 9 January 2023).
37.   Certifying IoT Devices: Azure Certified Device Program. Available online: https://www.microsoft.com/azure/partners/azure-
      certified-device (accessed on 9 January 2023).
38.   Microsoft Azure Stack Edge. Available online: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/azure-stack/edge/ (accessed on
      9 January 2023).
39.   Google Distributed Cloud. Available online: https://cloud.google.com/distributed-cloud (accessed on 9 January 2023).
40.   Open Container Initiative. Available online: https://opencontainers.org/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
41.   containerd: An Industry-Standard Container Runtime with an Emphasis on Simplicity, Robustness and Portability. Available
      online: https://containerd.io/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
42.   runC: CLI Tool for Spawning and Running Containers According to the OCI Specification. Available online: https://github.com/
      opencontainers/runc (accessed on 9 January 2023).
43.   Moby Project. Available online: https://mobyproject.org/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
44.   crun: A Fast and Lightweight Fully Featured OCI Runtime and C Library for Running Containers. Available online: https:
      //github.com/containers/crun (accessed on 9 January 2023).
45.   Youki: A Container Runtime Written in Rust. Available online: https://github.com/containers/youki (accessed on 9 January 2023).
46.   CRI-O. Available online: https://cri-o.io/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
47.   EVE—LF Edge. Available online: https://www.lfedge.org/projects/eve/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
48.   EVE Kubernetes Control Plane Integration—Draft. Available online: https://wiki.lfedge.org/display/EVE/EVE+Kubernetes+
      Control+Plane+Integration+-+Draft (accessed on 9 January 2023).
49.   BalenaOS—Run Docker Containers on Embedded IoT Devices. Available online: https://www.balena.io/os/ (accessed on
      9 January 2023).
50.   Yocto Project. Available online: https://www.yoctoproject.org/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
51.   BalenaEngine: A Container Engine Purpose-Built for IoT Devices. Available online: https://www.balena.io/engine/ (accessed on
      9 January 2023).
52.   Buehrle, A. Why Embedded Linux Needs a Container Manager Written in C. Available online: https://pantacor.com/blog/
      embedded-linux-need-container-manager/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
53.   Pantavisor: A framework for containerized embedded Linux. Available online: https://pantavisor.io/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
54.   Truyen, E.; van Landuyt, D.; Preuveneers, D.; Lagaisse, B.; Joosen, W. A Comprehensive Feature Comparison Study of Open-
      Source Container Orchestration Frameworks. Appl. Sci. 2019, 9, 931. [CrossRef]
55.   Paszkiewicz, A.; Bolanowski, M.; Ćwikła, C.; Ganzha, M.; Paprzycki, M.; Palau, C.E.; Lacalle Úbeda, I. Network Load Balancing for
      Edge-Cloud Continuum Ecosystems. In Innovations in Electrical and Electronic Engineering; Mekhilef, S., Shaw, R.N., Siano, P., Eds.;
      Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland GmbH: Antalya, Turkey, 2022; Volume 894 LNEE, pp. 638–651.
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                                            25 of 27




56.   Balouek-Thomert, D.; Renart, E.G.; Zamani, A.R.; Simonet, A.; Parashar, M. Towards a Computing Continuum: Enabling
      Edge-to-Cloud Integration for Data-Driven Workflows. Int. J. High Perform. Comput. Appl. 2019, 33, 1159–1174. [CrossRef]
57.   Kayal, P. Kubernetes in Fog Computing: Feasibility Demonstration, Limitations and Improvement Scope. In Proceedings of
      the IEEE World Forum on Internet of Things, WF-IoT 2020, New Orleans, LA, USA, 2–16 June 2020; Institute of Electrical and
      Electronics Engineers Inc.: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2020.
58.   Jeffery, A.; Howard, H.; Mortier, R. Rearchitecting Kubernetes for the Edge. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on
      Edge Systems, Analytics and Networking, EdgeSys 2021, Part of EuroSys 2021, Online Event, UK, 26 April 2021; Association for
      Computing Machinery, Inc: Edinburgh, UK, 2021; pp. 7–12.
59.   K3s: Lightweight Kubernetes. Available online: https://k3s.io/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
60.   K3OS: The Kubernetes Operating System. Available online: https://k3os.io/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
61.   MicroK8s—Zero-Ops Kubernetes for Developers, Edge and IoT. Available online: https://microk8s.io/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
62.   ASSIST-IoT Project D6.5 Technical Support Documentation—Initial; 30 April 2022. Available online: https://assist-iot.eu/wp-
      content/uploads/2022/05/D6.5_Technical_Support_Documentation_Initial.pdf (accessed on 9 January 2023).
63.   Kjorveziroski, V.; Filiposka, S. Kubernetes Distributions for the Edge: Serverless Performance Evaluation. J. Supercomput. 2022, 78,
      13728–13755. [CrossRef]
64.   Cilium: Linux Native, API-Aware Networking and Security for Containers. Available online: https://cilium.io/ (accessed on
      9 January 2023).
65.   Szmeja, P.; Fornés-Leal, A.; Lacalle, I.; Palau, C.E.; Ganzha, M.; Pawłowski, W.; Paprzycki, M.; Schabbink, J. ASSIST-IoT: A
      Modular Implementation of a Reference Architecture for the Next Generation Internet of Things. Electronics 2023, 12, 854.
      [CrossRef]
66.   KubeEdge: A Kubernetes Native Edge Computing Framework. Available online: https://kubeedge.io/en/ (accessed on
      9 January 2023).
67.   KubeEdge EdgeMesh: Simplified Network and Services for Edge Applications. Available online: https://github.com/kubeedge/
      edgemesh (accessed on 9 January 2023).
68.   Xu, W. Test Report on KubeEdge’s Support for 100,000 Edge Nodes. Available online: https://kubeedge.io/en/blog/scalability-
      test-report/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
69.   Kubernetes on Edge Day 2021: KubeEdge and Kubernetes Help Manage All the Monitoring Devices on the World’s Longest Cross-
      Sea Bridge. Available online: https://kubenetesedgedayeu21.sched.com/event/iS2I/kubeedge-and-kubernetes-help-manage-
      all-the-monitoring-devices-on-the-worlds-longest-cross-sea-bridge-huan-wei-harmonycloud (accessed on 9 January 2023).
70.   Sedna Documentation. Available online: https://sedna.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
71.   OpenYurt: An Open Platform That Extends Upstream Kubernetes to Edge. Available online: https://openyurt.io/ (accessed on
      9 January 2023).
72.   SuperEdge: An Open-Source Container Management System for Edge Computing. It Extends Native Kubernetes to the Edge in a
      Non-Intrusive WAY. Available online: https://superedge.io/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
73.   EdgeX Foundry: The Enabled Open Software Platform. Available online: https://www.edgexfoundry.org/ (accessed on
      9 January 2023).
74.   Open Horizon—LF Edge. Available online: https://www.lfedge.org/projects/openhorizon/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
75.   Baetyl: Baetyl, Extend Cloud Computing, Data and Service Seamlessly to Edge Devices. Available online: https://baetyl.io/en/
      (accessed on 9 January 2023).
76.   Eclipse IoFog. Available online: https://iofog.org/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
77.   Akri: A Kubernetes Resource Interface for the Edge. Available online: https://docs.akri.sh/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
78.   Akri: Custom Discovery Handlers. Available online: https://github.com/project-akri/akri-docs/blob/main/docs/
      development/handler-development.md (accessed on 10 January 2023).
79.   Sultan, S.; Ahmad, I.; Dimitriou, T. Container Security: Issues, Challenges, and the Road Ahead. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 52976–52996.
      [CrossRef]
80.   Morabito, R.; Cozzolino, V.; Ding, A.Y.; Beijar, N.; Ott, J. Consolidate IoT Edge Computing with Lightweight Virtualization.
      IEEE Netw. 2018, 32, 102–111. [CrossRef]
81.   Kumar, R.; Thangaraju, B. Performance Analysis between RunC and Kata Container Runtime. In Proceedings of the 6th IEEE
      International Conference on Electronics, Computing and Communication Technologies, CONECCT 2020, Bangalore, India,
      2–4 July 2020; Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2020.
82.   Kata Containers: Open-Source Container Runtime, Building Lightweight Virtual Machines That Seamlessly Plug into the
      Containers Ecosystem. Available online: https://katacontainers.io/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
83.   Li, Z.; Group, A.; Cheng, J.; Chen, Q.; Guan, E.; Bian, Z.; Tao, Y.; Zha, B.; Wang, Q.; Han, W.; et al. RunD: A Lightweight Secure
      Container Runtime for High-Density Deployment and High-Concurrency Startup in Serverless Computing. In Proceedings of the
      2022 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, Carlsbad, CA, USA, 11–13 July 2022.
84.   Madhavapeddy, A.; Scott, D.J. Unikernels: Rise of the Virtual Library Operating System. Queue 2013, 11, 30–44. [CrossRef]
85.   Sarrigiannis, I.; Contreras, L.M.; Ramantas, K.; Antonopoulos, A.; Verikoukis, C. Fog-Enabled Scalable C-V2X Architecture for
      Distributed 5G and beyond Applications. IEEE Netw. 2020, 34, 120–126. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                                               26 of 27




86.  Goethals, T.; Sebrechts, M.; Atrey, A.; Volckaert, B.; de Turck, F. Unikernels vs Containers: An in-Depth Benchmarking Study
     in the Context of Microservice Applications. In Proceedings of the 8th IEEE International Symposium on Cloud and Services
     Computing, SC2 2018, Paris, France, 18–21 November 2018; pp. 1–8. [CrossRef]
87. MirageOS: A Programming Framework for Building Type-Safe, Modular Systems. Available online: https://mirage.io/ (accessed on
     9 January 2023).
88. Nabla Containers: A New Approach to Container Isolation. Available online: https://nabla-containers.github.io/ (accessed on
     9 January 2023).
89. Runnc: OCI-Interfacing Container Runtime for Nabla Containers. Available online: https://github.com/nabla-containers/runnc
     (accessed on 9 January 2023).
90. UNICORE EU H2020 Project. Available online: https://unicore-project.eu/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
91. Unikraft: A Fast, Secure and Open-Source Unikernel Development Kit. Available online: https://unikraft.org/ (accessed on
     9 January 2023).
92. Kuenzer, S.; Bădoiu, V.-A.; Lefeuvre, H.; Santhanam, S.; Jung, A.; Gain, G.; Soldani, C.; Lupu, C.; Răducanu, C.; Banu, C.; et al.
     Unikraft: Fast, Specialized Unikernels the Easy Way. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth European Conference on Computer Systems,
     Online Event, UK, 26–28 April 2021; pp. 376–394.
93. Jung, A. KubeCon + CloudNative North America 2021: Deploying Unikernels in Production with Kubernetes. Available online:
     https://kccncna2021.sched.com/event/lV2y/deploying-unikernels-in-production-with-kubernetes-alexander-jung-lancaster-
     university (accessed on 9 January 2023).
94. WebAssembly. Available online: https://webassembly.org/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
95. WebAssembly Community Group WebAssembly Specification Release 2.0 (Draft 2023-02-13); 2023. Available online: https:
     //webassembly.github.io/spec/core/_download/WebAssembly.pdf (accessed on 13 February 2023).
96. Jangda, A.; Powers, B.; Berger, E.D.; Guha, A. Not So Fast: Analyzing the Performance of WebAssembly vs. Native Code.
     In Proceedings of the 2019 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, Renton, WA, USA, 10 August 2019; pp. 107–120.
97. Musch, M.; Wressnegger, C.; Johns, M.; Rieck, K. New Kid on the Web: A Study on the Prevalence of Webassembly in the Wild.
     In Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics);
     Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2019; Volume 11543 LNCS, pp. 23–42.
98. Ménétrey, J.; Pasin, M.; Felber, P.; Schiavoni, V. WebAssembly as a Common Layer for the Cloud-Edge Continuum. In
     Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Flexible Resource and Application Management on the Edge, FRAME 2022, Co-Located
     with HPDC 2022, Minneapolis, MN, USA, 1 July 2022; Association for Computing Machinery, Inc.: Minneapolis, MN, USA,
     2022; pp. 3–8.
99. Mäkitalo, N.; Mikkonen, T.; Pautasso, C.; Bankowski, V.; Daubaris, P.; Mikkola, R.; Beletski, O. WebAssembly Modules as
     Lightweight Containers for Liquid IoT Applications. In Proceedings of the Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including
     Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), Biarritz, France, 18–21 May 2021;
     Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland GmbH: Berlin, Germany, 2021; Volume 12706 LNCS, pp. 328–336.
100. WASI: WebAssembly System Interface. Available online: https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI (accessed on 9 January 2023).
101. Clark, L. Standardizing WASI: A System Interface to Run WebAssembly Outside the Web. Available online: https://hacks.
     mozilla.org/2019/03/standardizing-wasi-a-webassembly-system-interface/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
102. Wen, E.; Weber, G. Wasmachine: Bring the Edge up to Speed with a Webassembly OS. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
     Conference on Cloud Computing, CLOUD, Virtual Event, 18–24 October 2020; IEEE Computer Society: Washington, DC, USA,
     2020; Volume 2020, pp. 353–360.
103. WASI Standarization Proposals. Available online: https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/blob/main/Proposals.md
     (accessed on 9 January 2023).
104. Wasmer: The Universal WebAssembly Runtime. Available online: https://wasmer.io/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
105. Wasmtime: A Fast and Secure Runtime for WebAssembly. Available online: https://wasmtime.dev/ (accessed on
     9 January 2023).
106. WasmEdge: Bring the Cloud-Native and Serverless Application Paradigms to Edge Computing. Available online: https://wasmedge.
     org/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
107. Menetrey, J.; Pasin, M.; Felber, P.; Schiavoni, V. Twine: An Embedded Trusted Runtime for WebAssembly. In Proceedings of
     the 2021 IEEE 37th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), Chania, Greece, 19–22 April 2021; IEEE: Piscataway,
     NJ, USA, 2021; pp. 205–216.
108. Charboneau, T. Why Containers and WebAssembly Work Well Together. Available online: https://www.docker.com/blog/why-
     containers-and-webassembly-work-well-together/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
109. Gain, B.C. When WebAssembly Replaces Docker. Available online: https://thenewstack.io/when-webassembly-replaces-docker/
     (accessed on 9 January 2023).
110. Irwin, M. Introducing the Docker+Wasm Technical Preview. Available online: https://www.docker.com/blog/docker-wasm-
     technical-preview/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
111. Kubernetes Reference Documentation: Runtime Class. Available online: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/
     runtime-class/ (accessed on 9 January 2023).
Sensors 2023, 23, 2215                                                                                                         27 of 27




112. Krustlet: Run WebAssembly Workloads in Your Kubernetes Cluster. Available online: https://krustlet.dev/ (accessed on
     9 January 2023).
113. Sebrechts, M.; Ramlot, T.; Borny, S.; Goethals, T.; Volckaert, B.; de Turck, F. Adapting Kubernetes Controllers to the Edge: On-
     Demand Control Planes Using Wasm and WASI. In Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International Conference on Cloud Networking,
     Paris, France, 2 September 2022.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
