 
 ORION: Intent-Aware Orchestration in Open RAN for SLA-Driven Network Management 
 Report GitHub Issue 
 × 
 Title: 
 Content selection saved. Describe the issue below: 
 Description: 
 Submit without GitHub 
 Submit in GitHub 
 arXiv is now an independent nonprofit! 
 Learn more 
 × 
 Back to arXiv 
 Why HTML? 
 Report Issue 
 Back to Abstract 
 Download PDF 
 Abstract 
 I Introduction 
 II Background 
 II-A O-RAN Architectural Elements 
 II-B Policies vs. Intents 
 II-C Intent Lifecycle 
 II-D Roles in Intent-Driven RAN 
 II-E Model Context Protocol 
 III Related Work 
 IV Proposed Architecture: ORION 
 IV-A Design Objectives 
 IV-B High-Level Architecture Overview 
 IV-C Component Details 
 IV-D End-to-End Intent Workflow 
 IV-E Extensibility and Standards Alignment 
 V Implementation and Prototype 
 V-A Frontend (Streamlit) 
 V-B 
 V-C 
 V-D CAMARA Mock API 
 V-E ( ) 
 V-F / Workflow 
 V-G Orion xApp 
 V-H E2Sim (e2sim-rc) 
 V-I Workflow 
 VI Evaluation 
 VI-A Experimental Setup 
 VI-B LLM Cost-Performance Analysis 
 VI-B 1 Token Consumption Patterns 
 VI-B 2 Reasoning Token Allocation 
 VI-B 3 Policy Creation Success 
 VI-B 4 Cost-Performance Tradeoff 
 VI-B 5 Slice-Type Classification Accuracy 
 VI-B 6 MCP Tool-Use Quality Assessment 
 VI-C Resource Consumption Analysis 
 VI-D End-to-End Latency Analysis 
 VII Conclusion 
 References 
 License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2603.03667v1 [cs.NI] 04 Mar 2026 
 ORION: Intent-Aware Orchestration in Open RAN for SLA-Driven Network Management 
 Gabriela da Silva Machado
 Gustavo Z. Bruno 
 Alexandre Huff 
 José Marcos Camara Brito 
 Cristiano B. Both 
 † † thanks: 
Manuscript received April XX, 2025. The research leading to this paper received support from the Program OpenRAN@Brasil. This work also received support from the Commonwealth Cyber Initiative, an investment in the advancement of cyber R&D, innovation, and workforce development.
Gustavo Zanatta Bruno and José Marcos Camara Brito are with the National Telecommunications Institute (INATEL). E-mail: gustavo.zanatta@posdoc.inatel.br, brito@inatel.br.
Gabriela da Silva Machado and Cristiano B. Both are with the University of Vale do Rio dos Sinos (UNISINOS). E-mail: cbboth@unisinos.br.
Alexandre Huff is with the Federal Technological University of Paraná (UFTPR). E-mail: alexandrehuff@utfpr.edu.br.
 Abstract 
 The disaggregation of the Radio Access Network (RAN) introduces unprecedented flexibility but significant operational complexity, necessitating automated management frameworks. However, current Open RAN (O-RAN) orchestration relies on fragmented manual policies, lacking end-to-end intent assurance from high-level requirements to low-level configurations. In this paper, we propose ORION, an O-RAN compliant intent orchestration framework that integrates Large Language Models (LLMs) via the Model Context Protocol (MCP) to translate natural language intents into enforceable network policies. ORION leverages a hierarchical agent architecture, combining an MCP-based Service Management and Orchestration (SMO) layer for semantic translation with a Non-Real-Time RIC rApp and Near-Real-Time RIC xApp for closed-loop enforcement. Extensive evaluations using GPT-5, Gemini 3 Pro, and Claude Opus demonstrate a 100% policy generation success rate for high-capacity models, highlighting significant trade-offs in reasoning efficiency. We show that ORION reduces provisioning complexity by automating the complete intent lifecycle, from ingestion to E2-level enforcement, paving the way for autonomous 6G networks. 
 Index Terms:  O-RAN, Intent-Based Networking, Large Language Models, Service Management and Orchestration, Network Slicing.
 I Introduction 
 The 5G ( 5G ) mobile communications ecosystem has embraced disaggregation and openness to unlock flexible service delivery, yet these same properties amplify the operational burden on RAN ( RAN ) operators  [ 1 ] . The O-RAN ( O-RAN ) architecture formalizes this transition by splitting control across the SMO ( SMO ) framework and the Non-RT ( Non-RT ) and Near-RT ( Near-RT ) RIC , each exposing programmatic interfaces for policy-driven control. In practice, operators must coordinate a growing catalog of rApp and xApp and reconcile the pace of software updates with strict SLA and SLO . They must also maintain end-to-end observability across disaggregated components  [ 2 ] . 
 IBN ( IBN ) has emerged to bridge high-level business goals and low-level network actions by offering formalism to capture desired outcomes and automating the translation into enforceable policies  [ 3 , 4 ] . Telecom bodies such as 3GPP ( 3GPP ) and ETSI ( ETSI ) now specify intent-driven management hooks for RAN automation. Industry proposals extend IBN with data-driven and LLM ( LLM )-based assistants  [ 5 , 6 , 7 ] . However, current IBN efforts focus either on cloud-native infrastructure abstractions or on intent-to-policy translation detached from O-RAN ’s dual-controller pipeline, delivering limited guarantees on SLA preservation and lacking an integrated lifecycle that spans clarification, validation, deployment, and continuous adaptation  [ 8 , 9 , 10 ] . 
 These gaps motivate our investigation of intent-aware orchestration tailored to O-RAN . We study how to couple LLM -assisted interfaces with O-RAN -compliant control loops so that operator intents become deployable, monitorable policies without compromising latency, throughput, or reliability commitments. The research question guiding this work is: How can O-RAN management be enabled using intents without compromising network quality and SLA compliance? 
 This paper makes the following contributions: 
 • 
 We introduce ORION, an intent-aware orchestration pipeline that aligns LLM -assisted intent capture with the SMO , Non-RT RIC , and Near-RT RIC roles, structuring slice-related requests through CAMARA ( CAMARA )’s NetworkSliceBooking schema to ground translations in telecom semantics. 
 • 
 We design validation and composition flows that span SMO applications, rApp , and xApp , ensuring intents progress through schema checks and policy generation before enforcement via A1 ( A1 ) and E2 ( E2 ) interfaces, establishing the architectural foundation for CLA ( CLA ) loops. 
 • 
 We implement a prototype combining MCP ( MCP ) services and O-RAN -compliant control functions that operationalizes the provisioning and activation phases of the proposed pipeline. 
 • 
 We provide a dataset of 100 natural language intents mapped to standard telecom slice types ( eMBB ( eMBB ), URLLC ( URLLC ), mMTC ( mMTC )) and QoS ( QoS ) parameters to benchmark translation fidelity in O-RAN contexts. 
 • 
 We conduct a comprehensive evaluation analyzing the cost-performance trade-offs, policy creation success rates, and tool-use reliability of six state-of-the-art LLM . Additionally, we assess the resource overhead and end-to-end latency of the proposed architecture, demonstrating its viability for resource-constrained edge deployments. 
 We evaluate ORION by examining translation fidelity, orchestration overhead, and the correctness of generated policies for representative slicing scenarios. 
 The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section  II reviews O-RAN orchestration and intent-based networking foundations. Section  III surveys prior art on intent-driven RAN management. Section  IV details the ORION architecture, and Section  V summarizes the prototype. Section  VI presents the evaluation and experimental analysis, while Section  VII concludes the paper. 
 II Background 
 This section establishes the foundational concepts required to understand the proposed intent-driven architecture. We first review the O-RAN control loops and interfaces, followed by the critical distinction between declarative intents and imperative policies. We then outline the standard intent lifecycle and the management roles responsible for its execution. Finally, we introduce the MCP , which underpins the LLM -based translation engine. 
 II-A O-RAN Architectural Elements 
 O-RAN disaggregates the 3GPP gNB ( gNB ) into virtualized CU ( CU ) and DU ( DU ) plus RU ( RU ) [ 1 ] . Two intelligent controllers, the Non-RT RIC (within the SMO ) and the Near-RT RIC (edge), enable policy- and ML ( ML )-driven optimization at complementary time scales ( Non-RT : > 1 ​ s >1\,\mathrm{s} ; Near-RT : 10 ​ ms 10\,\mathrm{ms} – 1 ​ s 1\,\mathrm{s} ) [ 11 ] . The SMO hosts modular management functions and rApp (service-level analytics and optimization), while the Near-RT RIC hosts xApp that execute near-real-time control loops over radio resources. 
 Data and control traverse distinct open interfaces: A1 conveys guidance from the Non-RT RIC to the Near-RT RIC ; E2 streams telemetry upward and distributes fine-grained control actions downward to CU / DU ; and O1 ( O1 ) supports FCAPS ( FCAPS ) management between the SMO and RAN elements [ 1 ] . This layering separates long-horizon optimization in the Non-RT domain from sub-second adaptation in the Near-RT edge domain. 
 The openness that enables innovation also creates coordination challenges: (i) heterogeneous vendor data models must be normalized; (ii) timing alignment between A1 and E2 control loops must avoid oscillations; and (iii) intent translation must ensure consistency when multiple rApp / xApp manipulate overlapping KPI [ 8 ] . These issues motivate the structured abstractions described next. 
 II-B Policies vs. Intents 
 In O-RAN , policies are structured rules: when events and conditions hold, specified actions execute to steer performance (e.g., load balancing or QoS objectives) across scoped entities (cells, slices, UE ( UE ) groups) via A1 -defined JSON ( JSON ) policy types [ 1 ] . They express “if/when → \rightarrow do” logic without explicitly declaring end-state semantics. Intents, by contrast, declare desired outcomes or operational goals (the what ), omitting the procedural how [ 5 ] . A single intent may decompose into multiple policies across domains (optimization, assurance, resource allocation) [ 3 ] . 
 Abstraction boundary: policies bind directly to enforcement interfaces ( A1 toward the Near-RT RIC , O1 for management operations, and, indirectly, E2 control via xApp ) [ 1 ] . In contrast, intents act as a contract specifying KPI (e.g., “average cell-edge throughput ≥ \geq X Mbps within latency constraint Y”) [ 5 ] . Translation engines map such KPI -oriented statements into one or more concrete policy objects plus monitoring queries. Policies are evaluated reactively on triggers; intents are continuously assured, with fulfillment engines monitoring KPI against target states and adapting underlying policies [ 12 ] . 
 Challenges include conflict detection (e.g., two intents driving contradictory PRB ( PRB ) allocation goals), measurability (ensuring each intent has observable success metrics), and drift handling (environmental changes invalidating earlier translations) [ 3 ] . Effective frameworks therefore (i) capture goals and constraints, (ii) validate feasibility against current topology and resources, (iii) translate into minimal, consistent policy sets, and (iv) maintain CLA adjustments to preserve declared outcomes [ 5 , 12 ] . 
 II-C Intent Lifecycle 
 The lifecycle comprises: Create (register goals, scope, constraints), Activate (begin fulfillment), Monitor/Assure (observe KPI , detect deviation), Modify (adjust goals or suspend state), Suspend (temporarily halt fulfillment), and Terminate (cease monitoring). Each state transition is auditable and can emit events that feed higher-level orchestration. 
 Fig. 1: Intent lifecycle states and transitions with default flow (1–6) and CLA feedback loops (7–8). 
 Fig.  1 illustrates these states. Solid arrows (1–6) depict the nominal flow from creation through activation and assurance to termination. Dashed arrows highlight the CLA feedback loops essential for O-RAN : arrow 7 represents corrective actions triggered when KPI deviate during monitoring, while arrow 8 captures re-translation or rollback following modifications. CLA evaluates whether observed state matches the declared outcome; deviations trigger re-translation (e.g., updated A1 policies) or operator notification, per 3GPP TS 28.312 [ 5 ] . This adaptive cycle ensures continuous alignment with declared goals under dynamic network conditions. 
 II-D Roles in Intent-Driven RAN 
 Within SMO -based handling, the RMIO ( RMIO ) formulates intents (goals, constraints, KPI targets, reporting cadence), owns lifecycle authority (modify, suspend, terminate), and defines assurance requirements. The RMIH ( RMIH ) advertises supported intent classes, interprets RMIO submissions, decomposes them into actionable policies/configurations ( A1 guidance, O1 management actions), orchestrates deployment, resolves alternative fulfillment strategies (optionally consulting the RMIO ), and performs continuous assurance. 
 Operationally, the RMIO queries capability advertisements, submits a validated intent, and receives an identifier with a reporting schedule. Subsequently, the RMIO is asynchronously notified of assurance status or required decisions (e.g., selecting among alternative resource trade-offs). The RMIH maintains a dependency graph mapping intents to generated policies and underlying xApp / rApp actions, enabling targeted updates rather than wholesale recomputation when only one KPI threshold changes. 
 The RMIH manages conflicts across coexisting intents (priority-based arbitration or multi-objective optimization) [ 3 ] , adapts policies upon KPI drift, and issues status/fulfillment reports [ 12 ] . This separation clarifies accountability (ownership vs. operational realization) and supports scalable multi-tenant automation in O-RAN , while providing clear hooks for auditing, rollback, and intent evolution. 
 Despite architectural openness, consistent and explainable translation from high-level intents to coherent multi-interface policies ( A1 , O1 , E2 ), while assuring outcomes under dynamic traffic, remains non-trivial. This motivates the related work and the proposed architecture that follow. 
 II-E Model Context Protocol 
 The MCP is an open standard protocol for connecting AI ( AI ) assistants to external data sources and tools, enabling models to produce context-aware responses [ 13 ] . MCP follows a client-server architecture where a host (e.g., an LLM application) establishes a connection with a server that provides access to external systems, databases, and specialized workflows [ 14 ] . 
 The architecture comprises an MCP Host, MCP Client, and MCP Server. The Host manages the Client and provides the execution environment. The Client acts as an intermediary, initiating requests to the Server and retrieving descriptions of available tools and capabilities. The Server executes operations on external systems. When a Host needs to perform an action, it queries the Server via the Client to discover tools, selects the appropriate one, and requests execution. The Server then performs the operation and returns the result [ 15 ] . 
 III Related Work 
 TABLE I: Related work on Intent for RAN / O-RAN : representation, translation, lifecycle/assurance, slicing, and O-RAN alignment 
 Year 
 Paper 
 Intent Rep. 
 Translation 
 Lifecycle/Assurance 
 Slicing 
 O-RAN Align. 
 2020 
 [ 16 ] 
 Graph-based RAN slice orchestration 
 2021 
 [ 12 ] 
 Rule-pipeline intent to KPI commands 
 2021 
 [ 3 ] 
 End-to-end IBN (standardized model) 
 2021 
 [ 17 ] 
 Intent-driven slice mgmt (power grid) 
 2022 
 [ 18 ] 
 TMF-aligned intent for E2E slicing 
 2023 
 [ 19 ] 
 NLP-powered private 5G management 
 2023 
 [ 8 ] 
 Hierarchical DRL for O-RAN xApp orchestration 
 2023 
 [ 20 ] 
 Intent-driven RAN slice orchestration (MARL) 
 2024 
 [ 21 ] 
 Intent-aware RRS for RAN slicing (RL) 
 2024 
 [ 2 ] 
 AI/ML-driven SMO framework in O-RAN 
 2024 
 [ 7 ] 
 INA-Infra: open intent-driven slicing stack 
 2024 
 [ 22 ] 
 AdapShare: RL-based intent spectrum sharing 
 2024 
 [ 23 ] 
 PACIFISTA: O-RAN conflict characterization 
 2025 
 [ 24 ] 
 LLM-hRIC: LLM-guided Non-RT + RL Near-RT 
 2025 
 [ 10 ] 
 LLM-xApp: NL-to-slice translation at Near-RT 
 2025 
 [ 9 ] 
 FEACI: translation quality scoring (RAN+Core) 
 2025 
 [ 25 ] 
 RSLAQ: SLA-driven QoS with A1/E2 loops 
 2025 
 [ 26 ] 
 Intent APIs for lifecycle control 
 2026 
 This Work 
 E2E Intent Orchestration 
 Yes   Partial   No 
 This section surveys intent-driven management for RAN / O-RAN . We first review the evolving standards landscape that establishes foundational definitions and operational roles for intent handling. Subsequently, we analyze recent research proposals across five architectural dimensions that dictate practical deployment: (i) intent representation , concerning how declarative goals and constraints are formally captured; (ii) translation and interpretation , covering the algorithmic mechanisms used to map high-level objectives into machine-executable policies; (iii) lifecycle and assurance , reflecting the capabilities for continuous monitoring, closed-loop validation, and conflict resolution; (iv) network slicing scope , detailing how intents govern the orchestration of dedicated resources; and (v) O-RAN alignment , indicating native integration with standard SMO and RIC control loops. Table  I summarizes the surveyed literature against these five evaluation dimensions. 
 Standards landscape. The treatment of intent has matured across SDO . TMF ( TMF )’s TMF921 Intent Management API (v5.0.0) binds explicitly to the TMF Intent Ontology, clarifying validation, capabilities, and exchange of machine-tractable intent objects [ 27 , 28 ] . In 3GPP , TS 28.312 (Rel-18 v18.8.0) formalizes quantifiable intents, feasibility and fulfillment reports, and priority/conflict semantics; it also details discovery of handler capabilities and aligns SMO / Non-RT roles with lifecycle hooks  [ 5 , 29 ] . ETSI ZSM ( ZSM ) provides the reference model for owner/handler roles and closed-loop operations [ 30 ] , and ZSM  016 adds a three-level conflict taxonomy with concrete detect-report-judge-fulfill interactions [ 6 ] . From the O-RAN angle, ETSI TS 103 985 (PAS) captures O-RAN WG2 A1 policy/ EI ( EI ) jobs and status flows [ 31 ] , while RFC ( RFC ) 9315 standardizes IBN terminology and separates fulfillment from assurance [ 4 ] . Together, these specifications define the contract for intent handling but stop short of an end-to-end, O-RAN -native reference instantiation. 
 Intent representation. Prior work spans natural-language interfaces, structured templates, and standards-based models. Natural-language inputs with operator-facing portals appear in  [ 19 , 17 , 8 ] , often coupled to guided forms to constrain ambiguity (e.g., specifying a desired KPI improvement like “increase throughput by 10%”  [ 8 ] ). Template- or rule-oriented forms are used in  [ 12 , 3 ] , where operators describe goals in predefined fields that map to policy rules. A standards-aligned approach adopts the TMF intent model, technology-agnostic goals with explicit semantics, as in [ 18 , 21 ] , which reduces interpretation ambiguity and eases decomposition into policies. 
 Translation and interpretation. Mapping high-level goals to concrete policies/configurations is handled via rule pipelines, graph-based reasoning, or NLP ( NLP )/ AI -assisted engines. [ 12 ] validates admissibility ( KPI /control-parameter scope), classifies content, then emits commands. Graph-based translators in [ 16 , 20 ] consult topology/resource/policy repositories to build intent–resource graphs and generate domain-specific RAN policies. [ 19 ] separates an Intent Engine ( NLP interface, API ( API ) intent matching, interpretation to API calls) from an AI Engine hosting ML models for low-level context, while TMF -aligned handling in [ 18 ] follows capability-driven translation. Several works mention validation/translation steps without full detail  [ 3 ] . Recently, LLM have been placed directly in the control loop: LLM-xApp translates dynamic UE QoS intents into slice configurations at Near-RT timescales [ 10 ] ; LLM-hRIC organizes translation hierarchically with LLM -guided Non-RT guidance and RL ( RL )-based Near-RT enforcement [ 24 ] ; Orange proposes FEACI to score translation quality across RAN + 5GC ( 5GC ) [ 9 ] ; and INA-Infra demonstrates an open O-RAN -based stack (Nephio+ rApp + xApp ) that operationalizes intent-to-slice flows [ 7 ] . Overall, a common pattern is feasibility checking, capability matching, construction of minimal consistent policy sets, and continuous feedback. 
 Lifecycle, assurance. Lifecycle operations (create, modify, suspend, terminate) and handler interfaces appear in [ 18 ] , and Parashar proposes a framework for automated provisioning and lifecycle control via intent-based APIs  [ 26 ] , while [ 17 ] maintains CLA by monitoring performance and adapting policies. These notions align with ETSI ZSM ’s owner/handler roles and declarative outcomes [ 30 ] , 3GPP TS 28.312’s intent semantics and lifecycle hooks  [ 5 ] , and RFC  9315’s distinction between fulfillment and assurance with drift remediation [ 4 ] . Standards have strengthened intent semantics and instrumentation: TMF921 v5.0.0 (Oct. 2024) binds to the TMF Intent Ontology (TIO), clarifying validation and exchange [ 27 ] ; and recent updates to 3GPP TS 28.312 (Jul. 2025) underscore this by specifying report subscription mechanisms for SMO / Non-RT handlers [ 5 , 29 ] . Research on runtime assurance and conflicts includes RSLAQ’s SLA → \to KPI mapping with A1 / E2 monitoring [ 25 ] and PACIFISTA’s rApp / xApp profiling with graph reasoning to predict conflict severity and KPM ( KPM ) impact [ 23 ] . Many prototypes still emphasize ingestion/initial fulfillment over long-horizon assurance, conflict reconciliation, and rollback. 
 Alignment with O-RAN . Only a subset explicitly instantiates O-RAN ’s Non-RT / Near-RT split with open interfaces. [ 3 ] places long-term policy/ ML in the Non-RT RIC and real-time control in the Near-RT RIC via A1 / O1 , while [ 8 ] uses hierarchical DRL ( DRL ) with Non-RT rApps issuing goals over A1 to Near-RT xApps. [ 19 ] integrates an intelligence layer adjacent to RAN , borrowing O-RAN concepts without a native end-to-end loop. Newer materials underscore native treatment of intent and conflicts in Non-RT / Near-RT loops, ETSI TS 103 985 captures A1 policy/ EI jobs and status [ 31 ] , and the O-RAN Alliance published an SMO Intent-driven Management TR (v5.0) and an A1 Policy Conflict Mitigation Study (v1.00) [ 32 ] . RL -based, O-RAN -consistent enforcement pipelines also appear (AdapShare; AI/ML-driven SMO) [ 22 , 2 ] . 
 Slicing scope and use cases. Objectives range from KPI /control-parameter tuning [ 12 ] to performance steering via rApp / xApp orchestration  [ 3 , 8 ] , with slicing-focused frameworks optimizing SLA satisfaction and resource allocation across RAN and sometimes 5GC [ 20 , 16 , 18 , 21 ] . Private 5G management with intent-driven slice provisioning is explored in [ 19 ] , while [ 17 ] maps intents to slice instances in a power-grid automation context. 
 Across the literature, there is convergence on: (i) declarative goal capture with explicit KPI and scope; (ii) repository-backed translation (capabilities, topology, policies) to derive consistent policies; and (iii) multi-timescale control where Non-RT guidance informs Near-RT enforcement. Yet no work delivers a complete ingestion → \to translation → \to enforcement → \to CLA pipeline that is natively O-RAN -embedded ( A1 / O1 / E2 ), standards-aligned ( TMF  &  3GPP models), and provides first-class conflict management (priority, reconciliation, degradation); even the most advanced proposals (e.g., RSLAQ’s SLA-to- KPI loop or LLM -xApp’s translator) cover only slices of the pipeline, and standards ( ZSM  016, TS 28.312) specify roles and messages but not an end-to-end reference instantiation. The proposed architecture addresses this gap with an ingestion-to-enforcement pipeline that exposes capability discovery, aligns lifecycle management with standards, and provides the architectural mechanisms to sustain CLA over O-RAN interfaces. We rate this work as partially fulfilling Lifecycle/Assurance (i.e., ) because, while the architecture specifies the full loop including conflict remediation, the current prototype operationalizes the critical path from ingestion to E2 enforcement, leaving long-term CLA as future work. 
 IV Proposed Architecture: ORION 
 This section presents ORION, an intent-aware orchestration pipeline for O-RAN that bridges natural-language intents and deployable RAN policies. ORION couples an LLM -assisted MCP client/server with O-RAN-compliant control functions (Non-RT/SMO and Near-RT RIC) and reuses the CAMARA NetworkSliceBooking API schema as a canonical template to structure slice-related intents. 
 IV-A Design Objectives 
 ORION pursues five core objectives. Automation with SLA -awareness ensures intents translate into machine-validated specifications that preserve latency, throughput, and reliability KPI s. Modularity decouples intent assistance, interpretation, composition, and policy handling, enabling each block to evolve independently. Role alignment maps responsibilities to SMO / RIC , adopts RMIO / RMIH semantics, and reuses open API schemas such as CAMARA . Strict O-RAN compliance integrates the Non-RT RIC for A1 policy distribution and the Near-RT RIC / xApp for E2 enforcement. Finally, extensibility supports cases beyond slicing (e.g., energy saving) by swapping schemas and tool adapters without pipeline redesign. 
 IV-B High-Level Architecture Overview 
 Figure  2 depicts ORION’s blocks spanning the SMO / Non-RT and Near-RT layers. The Intent Management implements an MCP Client that receives the intent requests from an operator or higher-layer system, invokes an LLM with domain tools provided by the MCP Server, which provides the LLM with context from external telecom API . For slicing, it exposes an API consumer aligned to CAMARA NetworkSliceBooking . Within the SMO , the MCP Client tracks tools aligned with the lifecycle to execute the request and ensure intents are well-formed and structured before creating a policy. The OrApp ( OrApp ) converts structured intents into concrete policy templates and parameters, performing domain calculations to derive SLA targets (e.g., mapping user requirements to throughput and latency budgets). Finally, the OxApp ( OxApp ) operates with A1 / E2 interaction: the Non-RT RIC publishes policies via A1 , and the OxApp performs the final resource translation, calculating exact PRB quotas based on real-time cell capacity, and enforces control through E2 toward gNB ( DU / CU ). 
 Fig. 2: ORION high-level architecture spanning SMO/Non-RT and Near-RT RIC: the MCP Client/Server structure intents using CAMARA ’s NetworkSliceBooking schema; the OrApp composes policies, and the OxApp enforces them via A1/E2. 
 IV-C Component Details 
 The MCP Client and Server jointly realize the intent assistance plane. The client orchestrates the LLM workflow: it recognizes incoming intent requests, forwards them to the server, invokes the appropriate tool, and returns the structured outcome to the SMO . It maintains conversation state and applies guardrails that promote deterministic mappings from natural language to schema fields. The server exposes tool endpoints and domain context to the LLM . For slicing, the server supplies a translator aligned with CAMARA ’s NetworkSliceBooking API 1 1 
 1 
 https://github.com/camaraproject/NetworkSliceBooking . This translator accepts an intent payload, builds a compliant JSON POST and returns a structured result. The design grounds the LLM in telecom constraints and decouples credentials and API logic from the model prompt. ORION adopts the NetworkSliceBooking resource model (e.g., slice profile, QoS requirements, area of service, duration) as a canonical skeleton for slice intents, enabling vendor-agnostic translation and simplifying validation and auditing. 
 Within the SMO / Non-RT domain, the MCP Host identifies the tool and provides the arguments so the MCP Client triggers the MCP Server tool, which performs the request to CAMARA ’s NetworkSliceBooking API for schema checks for completeness (mandatory fields), consistency (ranges and units), and feasibility (capability match). Ambiguities are surfaced to the MCP Client to request clarifications, ensuring that only admissible, complete intents progress to composition. 
 The OrApp and OxApp execute the translation and enforcement workflow. Given a validated structured intent, the OrApp computes control parameters and maps them into policy templates; for slicing, this includes allocating throughput/latency/reliability budgets, selecting scheduler and QoS classes, and defining E2 monitoring metrics. The Non-RT RIC publishes policies via A1 , and the OxApp enforces them through E2 towards gNB ( DU / CU ). The OxApp monitors KPM and drives CLA updates by requesting recomputation or rollback when deviations are detected. 
 IV-D End-to-End Intent Workflow 
 The end-to-end lifecycle covers six phases.
Ingestion: an operator issues a slice intent and the MCP Client initializes the LLM session.
Translation: the LLM calls the MCP Server tool, which structures the request per CAMARA NetworkSliceBooking and returns JSON .
Validation: the MCP Client and MCP Server verify correctness and feasibility and may request clarifications.
Composition: the OrApp turns the validated intent into policy templates and parameter values.
Deployment: the Non-RT RIC publishes policies via A1 and the OxApp enforces them through E2 toward gNB .
Monitoring and adaptation: KPI trigger recomputation, incremental updates, or rollback when deviations appear. 
 IV-E Extensibility and Standards Alignment 
 Roles map to RMIO / RMIH : the operator or service assumes RMIO , while the MCP Client and OrApp act as RMIH . ORION aligns with O-RAN by placing intent management and composition in the Non-RT / SMO domain and using A1 / E2 for control, consistent with 3GPP intent definitions  [ 5 ] . By treating CAMARA API as interchangeable schema backends, the same pattern generalizes to other intents (energy saving, load balancing) by swapping the tool and policy templates without altering the core workflow. 
 Example trace. 
 ”Provision a URLLC slice in area X with 1 ms latency and 99.999% reliability for 2 hours.” An operator issues the request, the MCP Client opens the LLM session, and the MCP Server tool produces NetworkSliceBooking JSON with latencyTarget =1 ms, reliability =99.999%, area = X , and duration =2 h. The MCP Client validates the payload and forwards it to the OrApp , which derives scheduler priorities and SLA constraints before emitting an A1 policy. The OxApp computes the necessary PRB reservations to meet these constraints, enforces the policy through E2 , and monitors URLLC KPI ; if latency exceeds 1 ms, the OrApp tightens scheduling deadlines or triggers rollback to a previous stable configuration. 
 V Implementation and Prototype 
 Fig. 3: Non-RT RIC Intent Execution Flow. 
 To validate the feasibility and performance of the proposed intent-driven architecture, we developed a comprehensive Proof of Concept (PoC). While the architecture (Section  IV ) encompasses the full intent lifecycle, this operational prototype focuses on the Creation and Activation phases. It validates the critical path of translating unstructured intent into enforceable policies, which is the prerequisite for any subsequent closed-loop assurance. This prototype realizes an end-to-end workflow, from natural language ingestion to varying RAN resource allocation, by integrating a Generative AI-based orchestration agent with standard O-RAN components. The system is deployed as a suite of containerized microservices, bridging the semantic gap between high-level user requirements and low-level E2SM ( E2SM ) configurations. The key components of the prototype are detailed below. 
 V-A Frontend (Streamlit) 
 A web-based user interface developed using the Streamlit framework allows users to input natural language intents. The interface renders the conversation history, maintaining distinct bubbles for user interaction, while persisting state across sessions. Communication with the MCP Client is handled via asynchronous HTTP ( HTTP ) POST requests targeting the /intent endpoint. 
 V-B SMO 
 The SMO implementation leverages the MCP to orchestrate the intent lifecycle. The MCP Client is built with FastAPI and integrates multiple LLM providers via a unified interface. It manages the system prompt, injected as a shimmed user message to enforce strict JSON output formats, and establishes a SSE ( SSE ) connection to the MCP Server to enable real-time tool execution. The MCP Server is developed using the Python mcp library to provide a standardized interface for network functions. It hosts the create_session tool, which acts as a proxy by receiving Pydantic-validated arguments and forwarding them to the underlying Slice API . 
 V-C LLM 
 We integrated state-of-the-art LLM s (including OpenAI GPT-5, Google Gemini 3 Pro, and Anthropic Claude Opus) to function as the cognitive engine. The LLM operates under a strict system prompt that prohibits the use of minimum values unless specified. The interaction creates a two-step process: first, the model selects a tool based on the user’s natural language intent; second, after tool execution, the model is prompted again to classify the traffic (e.g., eMBB , URLLC ) based on the session parameters. 
 V-D CAMARA Mock API 
 A mock server implementing the CAMARA Network Slice Booking API was developed to strategies for exposing network resources. The core endpoint, POST /sessions , accepts booking requests adhering to OpenAPI 3.0.3 schemas. To ensure stability, a lightweight admission control mechanism is engaged using an in-memory storage dictionary; requests are rejected with a 429 TOO_MANY_REQUESTS status if the active session count exceeds a predefined threshold. 
 V-E OrApp ( Non-RT RIC ) 
 The OrApp exposes a POST /generate-policy endpoint to receive structured intent data. Its primary role is to act as an intent translation engine, converting the high-level operational requirements into precise SLA objectives. Instead of computing low-level resource quotas (which depend on dynamic RAN conditions), the OrApp derives the target QoS metrics, such as maximum throughput, latency budgets, and packet error rates, required to satisfy the user’s intent. 
 The final output is an A1 Policy JSON payload containing the slice ID, scope, and these specific SLO objectives. Crucially, the policy also includes the slice_type (e.g., URLLC , eMBB ). This semantic tag allows the OxApp to select appropriate scheduling disciplines (e.g., Earliest Deadline First for URLLC vs. Proportional Fair for eMBB ) that raw QoS integers alone cannot fully imply. An example of such a generated policy payload is shown in Listing  1 . 
 Listing 1: Example A1 Policy Instance generated by the OrApp. 
 ⬇ 
 1 
 { " ric_id " : " ric4 " , 
 2 
 " policy_id " : " 4 8 7 8 2 " , 
 3 
 " service_id " : " intentSlice " , 
 4 
 " policy_data " : { 
 5 
 " scope " : { 
 6 
 " sliceId " : { 
 7 
 " sst " : 1 , 
 8 
 " sd " : " 4 5 6 DEF " , 
 9 
 " plmnId " : { 
 10 
 " mcc " : " 7 2 4 " , 
 11 
 " mnc " : " 1 1 " } , 
 12 
 " nci " : 1 } , 
 13 
 " sliceType " : " mMTC " } , 
 14 
 " sliceSlaObjectives " : { 
 15 
 " maxDlThptPerUe " : 5 0 0 0 0 , 
 16 
 " maxUlThptPerUe " : 2 5 0 0 0 , 
 17 
 " maxDlThptPerSlice " : 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 , 
 18 
 " maxUlThptPerSlice " : 1 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 } } , 
 19 
 " policytype_id " : 1 0 0 0 2 } 
 V-F SMO / Non-RT RIC Workflow 
 The interaction flow within the SMO and Non-RT RIC is depicted in Figure  3 . This intent translation process follows a sequence initiated by the user’s intent declaration. The workflow commences when the user inputs a natural language intent via the Streamlit frontend ( Step 1 ). The MCP Client captures this input and constructs a prompt for the LLM , including the tool definitions ( Step 2 ). Based on the prompt, the LLM identifies the need for network capabilities, selects the network_slice_booking tool, and returns the arguments for the request ( Step 3 ). The MCP Client then formally requests the execution of this tool from the MCP Server ( Step 4 ). To validate the feasibility of the request, the MCP Server queries the CAMARA API ( Step 5 ), which performs admission control and allocates resources. Upon success, the CAMARA API returns a Session ID and the confirmed QoS parameters ( Step 6 ). This result is relayed back to the MCP Client ( Step 7 ), which feeds the structured output back into the LLM context ( Step 8 ). The LLM then synthesizes the final configuration payload in JSON format, identifying the slice type ( Step 9 ). Finally, the MCP Client transmits this structured intent to the OrApp within the Non-RT RIC for policy generation ( Step 10 ). 
 Fig. 4: Sequence diagram of the control loop. 
 V-G Orion xApp 
 The OxApp is a C++ based application deployed on the Near-RT RIC platform. Acting as the A1 Interface termination point, it receives JSON -based policies from the Non-RT RIC via the A1 Mediator. Upon receiving a policy, the OxApp is responsible for the dynamic translation of SLA objectives into concrete resource allocations. 
 To determine the resource quota, the OxApp first retrieves the current configuration of the target E2 Node (e.g., bandwidth, numerology, and MIMO ( MIMO ) layers) to determine the Maximum Cell Capacity. It then calculates the required PRB percentage to meet the requested throughput using the formula: 
 PRB % = ⌈ Requested Throughput Max Cell Capacity × 100 ⌉ \text{PRB}_{\%}=\left\lceil\frac{\text{Requested Throughput}}{\text{Max Cell Capacity}}\times 100\right\rceil 
 (1) 
 The core functionality then maps this calculated percentage into E2SM -RC structures. These control messages are encoded using ASN.1 ( ASN.1 ) PER ( PER ) for transmission over E2AP ( E2AP ), enforcing the slice boundaries directly at the scheduler level. 
 V-H E2Sim ( E2Sim ) ( e2sim-rc ) 
 The e2sim-rc is an extension of the OSC ( OSC ) E2Sim , modified to support E2SM , emulating a gNB capable of advanced resource control. During the initialization phase, it performs the E2 Setup procedure, advertising support for E2SM -RC Control Style 2 (Radio Resource Allocation) and Action ID 6 (Slice-level PRB quota). The simulator is designed to decode incoming RIC Control Requests and apply PRB partitioning logic. Additionally, it implements a capacity validation mechanism acting as a resource guard to reject any control requests that would exceed the total available PRB capacity of the cell, ensuring network stability. 
 V-I Near-RT RIC Workflow 
 The interaction between the OxApp and the RAN is illustrated in the sequence diagram (Figure  4 ). The process follows a control loop triggered by the arrival of a new policy. The cycle begins when the A1 Mediator pushes a policy to the OxApp via the RMR ( RMR ) interface ( Step 1 ). The OxApp parses the JSON payload to extract the target slice identifier and SLA objectives ( Step 2 ). To determine enforcement targets, the OxApp queries the E2Mgr ( E2Mgr ) ( Step 3 ), which returns a list of connected E2 Nodes and their inventory ( Step 4 ). The OxApp ’s translation engine converts the parsed SLA parameters into an E2SM -RC Control Header and Control Message, specifying the Control Style (Type 2), Action ID (6), and RAN Parameters for PRB Policy Ratios ( Step 5 ). These structures are encapsulated into an E2AP RICcontrolRequest PDU ( PDU ) and encoded into binary format ( Step 6 ). 
 The encoded message is sent to the E2 Termination via RMR ( Step 7 ), which forwards it to the specific E2 Node over SCTP ( SCTP ) ( Step 8 ). Upon receipt, the e2sim-rc decodes the payload and processes the request ( Step 9 ), validating that the new allocation respects the node’s capacity before updating the scheduler. If successful, the simulator generates a RICcontrolAcknowledge message sent back to the E2 Termination ( Step 10 ). This acknowledgement is routed to the OxApp ( Step 11 ), confirming the configuration. Finally, the OxApp reports the operation status to the Non-RT RIC via an A1 Policy Response ( Step 12 ), closing the control loop. 
 VI Evaluation 
 This section evaluates the ORION framework’s efficacy in automating intent-driven network orchestration. 2 2 
 2 
 Analysis scripts, datasets, and figures are publicly available at: https://github.com/zanattabruno/analysis-orion Our primary objectives are to quantify: (1) the reliability of LLM -driven agents in translating high-level intents into valid A1 policies; (2) the cost-performance trade-offs between competing foundational model architectures; (3) the classification accuracy of 3GPP slice-type inference from unstructured intents; and (4) the latency and resource overhead imposed by the MCP -based orchestration architecture on the O-RAN infrastructure. 
 VI-A Experimental Setup 
 To validate translation fidelity and orchestration performance, we utilize a curated evaluation dataset comprising 100 natural language intents. The dataset distribution is weighted to reflect the connection density inherent to 5G deployment scenarios  [ 33 ] : 
 • 
 eMBB (20 samples): High-throughput scenarios such as video journalism, cloud gaming, and 4K media streaming, prioritizing downstream rates (e.g., 100–500 Mbps) and moderate latency. 
 • 
 URLLC (20 samples): Critical, low-latency applications including autonomous robotics, remote surgery, and industrial automation, targeting strict packet delay budgets (1–7 ms) and high availability. 
 • 
 mMTC (60 samples): Massive connectivity use cases like smart city sensors, environmental monitoring, and utility metering. This category is oversampled to represent the high heterogeneity and massive scale of IoT endpoints (target density of 10 6 10^{6} devices/km 2   [ 34 ] ), where intents must handle diverse duty cycles and reporting intervals. 
 Each entry in the dataset pairs a realistic unstructured operator prompt (e.g., “Provision a slice for drone traffic management…”) with its structured ground truth, including the specific slice type, required throughput, latency constraints, and device capacity. This dataset serves as the input workload for the SMO layer to quantify the LLM ’s ability to correctly extract and map intents to the CAMARA -compliant NetworkSliceBooking schema. 
 The dataset was created based on the intents used by  [ 35 ] and the network slice types defined by 3GPP . This data was structured into a prompt, along with ORION’s operating characteristics, to generate different intent types using GPT-5 in a supervised manner. 
 The experimental testbed was hosted on a Kubernetes cluster deployed on a VMware-virtualized host running Ubuntu 24.04.2 LTS. The virtualized infrastructure was provisioned with 12 vCPUs (Intel Xeon X5660 @ 2.80 GHz) and 23 GiB of RAM, representing resource-constrained legacy edge infrastructure. This environment hosted the full ORION stack, including the SMO framework, Non-RT and Near-RT RIC instances, and the RAN simulation components. 
 VI-B LLM Cost-Performance Analysis 
 To evaluate the operational viability of LLM -based intent translation in the SMO layer, we benchmarked six state-of-the-art models from three providers: Claude Opus 4.5 and Sonnet 4.5 (Anthropic), Gemini 3 Flash and Pro (Google), and GPT-5 and GPT-5 Nano (OpenAI). Each model processed identical O-RAN network slice intents spanning eMBB , URLLC , and mMTC use cases, with the SMO orchestrating tool calls to translate natural language requests into A1 policies. Table  II summarizes the key performance metrics. 
 TABLE II: LLM Performance Comparison for Intent Processing 
 Model 
 N 
 Input Tokens 
 Output Tokens 
 Reasoning (%) 
 Cost (cents/intent) 
 Success (%) 
 Claude Opus 4.5 
 100 
 18,766 ± \pm 9,616 
 204 ± \pm 115 
 N/A 
 29.68 
 100.0 
 Claude Sonnet 4.5 
 100 
 15,270 ± \pm 9,679 
 154 ± \pm 16 
 N/A 
 4.81 
 17.0 
 Gemini 3 Flash 
 77 
 15,090 ± \pm 8,308 
 2,418 ± \pm 2,028 
 23.1 
 0.19 
 85.7 
 Gemini 3 Pro 
 78 
 15,226 ± \pm 8,173 
 2,394 ± \pm 2,787 
 21.0 
 3.10 
 100.0 
 GPT-5 Nano 
 100 
 26,349 ± \pm 14,797 
 1,512 ± \pm 381 
 4.9 
 0.49 
 97.0 
 GPT-5 
 100 
 27,306 ± \pm 15,138 
 775 ± \pm 226 
 2.4 
 7.60 
 100.0 
 VI-B 1 Token Consumption Patterns 
 Input token consumption varies significantly across models, ranging from 15,090 (Gemini 3 Flash) to 27,306 (GPT-5),a 1.8 × \times difference (Fig.  5 ). This variance reflects differing tokenization strategies and context window utilization. OpenAI models exhibit consistently higher input consumption due to their tokenizer encoding MCP tool schemas less efficiently. Output tokens show even greater variance: Gemini models produce 2,394–2,418 output tokens on average, compared to 154–775 for Anthropic and OpenAI models. This disparity stems from Gemini’s verbose chain-of-thought outputs, which include explicit reasoning steps in the response. 
 Fig. 5: Token consumption per intent across LLM providers (log scale). Solid bars represent input tokens; hatched bars represent output tokens. Error bars indicate standard deviation. 
 VI-B 2 Reasoning Token Allocation 
 Models that expose reasoning tokens exhibit markedly different computational strategies (Fig.  6 ). Gemini models allocate 21–23% of their total token budget to explicit reasoning, compared to only 2.4–4.9% for GPT-5 variants. This architectural difference suggests that Gemini employs more deliberate chain-of-thought processing for intent-to-policy translation, while GPT-5 models rely on more direct inference patterns. Anthropic models do not expose reasoning tokens in their API response, precluding direct comparison of their internal deliberation overhead. 
 Fig. 6: Token allocation breakdown showing input, output, and reasoning components. Anthropic models report zero reasoning tokens as this metric is not exposed via their API . 
 VI-B 3 Policy Creation Success 
 Policy creation success rate measures the model’s ability to correctly invoke the MCP tool and generate a valid A1 policy (Fig.  7 ). Four models achieved ≥ \geq 97% success: Claude Opus 4.5 (100%), Gemini 3 Pro (100%), GPT-5 (100%), and GPT-5 Nano (97%). Gemini 3 Flash achieved 85.7% due to occasional malformed tool invocations. Claude Sonnet 4.5 exhibited only 17% success, consistently failing to invoke the MCP tool despite correctly understanding the intent semantics,a limitation in the model’s function-calling capability rather than intent comprehension. This finding highlights that raw language understanding does not guarantee reliable tool orchestration, a critical consideration for agentic SMO deployments. 
 Fig. 7: Policy creation success rate by model. Success requires correct MCP tool invocation and valid A1 policy generation. 
 VI-B 4 Cost-Performance Tradeoff 
 Our analysis reveals a 156 × \times cost differential between the most economical (Gemini 3 Flash at 0.19 cents/intent) and most expensive (Claude Opus 4.5 at 29.68 cents/intent) models (Fig.  8 ). Critically, cost does not correlate with success rate: Gemini 3 Flash, the cheapest option, achieves 85.7% success, while the second-cheapest GPT-5 Nano (0.49 cents/intent) achieves 97%. For production deployments, this finding has significant operational implications. An O-RAN system processing 10,000 daily intents would incur annual API costs ranging from $694 (Gemini 3 Flash) to $108,332 (Claude Opus 4.5). Given comparable success rates, cost-optimized model selection can reduce operational expenses by two orders of magnitude without sacrificing reliability. 
 Fig. 8: API cost per intent across LLM providers (log scale). Error bars represent standard deviation across intents. 
 VI-B 5 Slice-Type Classification Accuracy 
 Beyond policy creation success, we evaluate the semantic correctness of the generated policies by measuring how accurately each model classifies the 3GPP slice type ( eMBB , URLLC , or mMTC ) implied by the natural language intent. Classification accuracy is computed deterministically: a prediction is correct if and only if the extracted slice type matches the ground-truth label assigned by domain experts. As illustrated in Fig.  9 , three performance tiers emerge. Claude Opus 4.5 leads with 99% accuracy across 101 intents, misclassifying only a single instance, while GPT-5 follows closely at 96%. In the mid-range, GPT-5 Nano achieves 90% and Gemini 3 Pro 77%. The lower tier comprises Gemini 3 Flash (66%) and Claude Sonnet 4.5 (13%). Notably, these accuracy figures are tightly coupled to the policy creation success rates reported in Table  II : Claude Sonnet 4.5’s 13% accuracy directly mirrors its 17% tool-invocation success; the model fails to call the MCP tool for 83% of intents, yielding no slice-type prediction at all. Similarly, Gemini 3 Flash achieves a 100% classification rate among the intents for which it produces a prediction (66 out of 66 correct), but its 66% prediction rate limits overall accuracy. 
 Fig. 9: Slice-type classification accuracy by model. Only intents for which the model produced a slice-type prediction are evaluated. 
 Among models that reliably produce predictions ( ≥ \geq 97% prediction rate), accuracy spans 90–99%, indicating that once the LLM successfully invokes the tool pipeline, the slice-type inference is highly reliable. This finding confirms that the primary bottleneck for intent-to-policy fidelity lies in the MCP tool orchestration layer rather than in the model’s semantic understanding of network slice requirements. 
 VI-B 6 MCP Tool-Use Quality Assessment 
 While the preceding metrics capture whether a model invokes the tool and what slice type it selects, they do not assess the fine-grained correctness of the generated tool arguments,i.e., whether every parameter in the NetworkSliceBooking schema was populated faithfully and no extraneous values were fabricated. To address this gap, we employ the DeepEval framework’s MCPUseMetric   [ 36 , 37 ] , which provides an automated, schema-aware evaluation of MCP tool-call quality. Each test case is constructed from the same 100-intent dataset: the prompt context comprises the system prompt (encoding eight field-population rules, e.g., “all fields stay null unless the user specifies them”) concatenated with the user intent, while the actual_output is the model’s raw tool-call response. An MCPServer descriptor,capturing the available tools, resources, and prompts exposed by the Orion MCP server via SSE ,provides the tool schema against which correctness is judged. No expected output is supplied; instead, a judge model (Claude Opus 4.5, temperature = 0) scores each response on a continuous 0–1 scale by assessing tool selection, argument structure, and value fidelity. 
 Fig.  10 presents the score distribution across all 600 evaluated test cases. Two distinct performance clusters emerge. Claude Opus 4.5 and GPT-5 Nano form a high-quality cluster, with probability densities concentrated in the upper quartile and mean scores of 0.85 and 0.82, respectively. GPT-5 exhibits a similar high-performance distribution but with a slightly lower mean of 0.75 due to a systematic pattern: the model consistently populates the upStreamDelayBudget field when the user mentions a generic “packet delay budget” without specifying directionality, which the evaluator penalizes as a Rule 8 violation (fabricating values for unspecified fields). In contrast, the Gemini models occupy a low-score cluster marked by broad, lower-bound-skewed distributions: Gemini 3 Pro achieves a mean of 0.36, while Gemini 3 Flash scores only 0.28. Claude Sonnet 4.5 falls between the two clusters, displaying a high-variance distribution with a mean of 0.55. 
 Fig. 10: DeepEval MCPUseMetric score distribution by model. Violin plots show kernel density estimates. 
 Failure analysis reveals three distinct root causes. First, both Gemini models systematically generate multiple redundant create_session invocations for a single user request (2–6 duplicate calls per intent), and their tool-call arguments are serialized in a truncated format ( <… 3 items at Max depth …> ), preventing the evaluator from verifying parameter correctness. This behavior likely stems from incompatibilities in the models’ function-calling serialization conventions and explains scores concentrated in the 0.20–0.45 range. Second, Claude Sonnet 4.5 exhibits an over-cautious refusal pattern: in 16% of test cases, it declines to invoke any tool and instead solicits follow-up information for fields that the system prompt explicitly designates as nullable,effectively treating optional schema fields as mandatory requirements. Third, as noted above, GPT-5 demonstrates ambiguous field placement , where a generic user reference to “delay budget” is mapped to both upstream and downstream parameters; while this interpretation is semantically defensible, it conflicts with the strict null-unless-specified instruction and results in consistent score deductions (typically from 0.9–0.95 to 0.55–0.65 on affected cases). These findings underscore that MCP tool-use quality is influenced not only by a model’s language comprehension but also by its adherence to schema constraints and its tool-calling serialization fidelity,factors that are largely opaque to conventional accuracy metrics. 
 VI-C Resource Consumption Analysis 
 We assessed the computational overhead of the proposed intent orchestration framework using the Prometheus monitoring stack to scrape CPU and memory metrics from the target Kubernetes namespaces. The evaluation captured the steady-state performance of the O-RAN platforms ( Non-RT RIC , Near-RT RIC ) and the developed MCP Server/Client, alongside the specific intent-handling components ( OrApp , OxApp ) and the E2Sim . As illustrated in Fig.  11 , the resource distribution reveals a stark contrast between the baseline infrastructure platforms and the lightweight orchestration logic implemented in this work. 
 Fig. 11: CPU (millicores) and Memory (MiB) usage by namespace (Mean ± \pm Std Dev). 
 The quantitative results confirm the efficiency of our approach. The Non-RT RIC remains the most resource-intensive component, consuming an average of 76.4 ± 3.4 76.4\pm 3.4  m CPU and ≈ 7.1 \approx 7.1  GiB of memory due to its comprehensive microservice suite, followed by the Near-RT RIC at 37.1 ± 4.6 37.1\pm 4.6  m CPU and 1.1 1.1  GiB memory. In comparison, the custom intent applications impose negligible overhead: the OrApp and OxApp consume only 1.5 ± 0.3 1.5\pm 0.3  m and 0.4 ± 0.0 0.4\pm 0.0  m CPU respectively, with memory footprints under 40 40  MiB, while the E2Sim accounts for the remaining ≈ 25.6 \approx 25.6  m overhead. With a total system-wide draw of approximately 141 141  millicores and 8.5 8.5  GiB RAM, the solution proves viable for deployment on resource-constrained edge servers. 
 VI-D End-to-End Latency Analysis 
 The end-to-end processing pipeline was analyzed to quantify the latency introduced by each architectural layer, from the user’s intent submission at the Frontend to the enforcement at the E2 Node. Fig.  12 illustrates the mean processing times for each stage. The total latency is dominated by the SMO layer, specifically the stochastic processing within the LLM components (OpenAI GPT-5). The translation of natural language intents into policy artifacts ( SMO Intent → \to Policy ) and the subsequent tool execution ( SMO MCP Tool Execution ) exhibit significant duration compared to the downstream components, contributing the majority of the total end-to-end delay. 
 In contrast to the SMO layer, the Near-RT RIC and E2 Node components demonstrate highly deterministic behavior with minimal variance. The xApp processing time ( xApp Full Policy Processing ) and the A1 Mediator latency remain consistently low, validating the platform’s suitability for near-real-time control loops. The variance observed in the upper layers, indicated by the error bars in Fig.  12 , is inherent to the generative nature of the LLM and network conditions during the initial REST ( REST ) interactions. Conversely, the strict timing requirements of the O-RAN specification are met by the lower layers, where the control loop operations ( xApp Policy → \to Control and E2 Node Control Processing ) execute within the sub-second/millisecond range required for effective RAN optimization. 
 Fig. 12: Mean processing time breakdown across O-RAN architectural layers. The diagram highlights the latency disparity between the compute-intensive intent processing in the SMO (purple) and the highly optimized, deterministic control operations in the Near-RT RIC (blue) and E2 Node (orange). Error bars indicate standard deviation. 
 VII Conclusion 
 We have presented ORION, an intent-driven orchestration framework that bridges the gap between high-level operator objectives and low-level O-RAN policy enforcement. By integrating LLM -powered agents within the SMO and standardizing intent translation via the CAMARA NetworkSliceBooking schema, we demonstrated a robust pipeline for automating network slice provisioning across eMBB , URLLC , and mMTC domains.
Our evaluation confirms that while state-of-the-art foundational models like Claude Opus 4.5 and GPT-5 achieve near-perfect translation fidelity ( > > 99% success), cost-optimized models such as GPT-5 Nano offer a viable operational alternative, delivering 97% success at a fraction of the inference cost.
Crucially, the architecture imposes negligible resource overhead on the RIC infrastructure, with the semantic processing latency confined to the SMO layer, ensuring that the critical Near-RT control loops remain deterministic.
ORION thus establishes a foundational reference for cognitive O-RAN management, proving that generative AI can be effectively harnessed to reduce operational complexity without compromising carrier-grade performance standards. 
 Future work will extend the evaluation to local LLM deployments, assessing trade-offs between inference latency, privacy compliance, and reasoning capability compared to cloud-hosted models. Additionally, we plan to fully instrument the closed-loop assurance mechanism, enabling the system to autonomously trigger intent modification and rollback based on real-time RAN telemetry. 
 Acknowledgment 
 This work has been partially funded by the project XGM-AFCCT-2024-5-1-1 supported by xGMobile - EMBRAPII - Inatel Competence Center on 5G and 6G Networks, with financial resources from the PPI IoT/Manufatura 4.0 / the MCTI grant number 052/2023, signed with EMBRAPII, and, partially funded by FAPESP Project PORVIR-5G (Grants No. 2020/05182-3 and 2025/01970-0). 
 References 
 [1] 
 M. Polese, L. Bonati, S. D’Oro, F. Restuccia, and T. Melodia (2023) 
 Understanding Open RAN: Architecture, Interfaces, and Research Challenges .
 IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 25 ( 2 ), pp. 1312–1346 .
 Cited by: §I ,
 §II-A ,
 §II-A ,
 §II-B ,
 §II-B .
 [2] 
 F. Habibi et al. (2024) 
 Towards an AI/ML-driven SMO Framework in O-RAN .
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.05092 .
 Note: Accessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §I ,
 TABLE I ,
 §III .
 [3] 
 L. Velasco, M. Signorelli, O. G. De Dios, C. Papagianni, R. Bifulco, J. J. V. Olmos, S. Pryor, G. Carrozzo, J. Schulz-Zander, M. Bennis, R. Martinez, F. Cugini, C. Salvadori, V. Lefebvre, L. Valcarenghi, and M. Ruiz (2021) 
 End-to-End Intent-Based Networking .
 IEEE Communications Magazine 59 ( 10 ), pp. 106–112 .
 External Links: Document 
 Cited by: §I ,
 §II-B ,
 §II-B ,
 §II-D ,
 TABLE I ,
 §III ,
 §III ,
 §III ,
 §III .
 [4] 
 A. Clemm, L. Ciavaglia, L. Z. Granville, and J. Tantsura (2022) 
 RFC 9315: Intent-based networking-concepts and definitions .
 RFC Editor .
 Cited by: §I ,
 §III ,
 §III .
 [5] 
 3GPP (2025) 
 TS 28.312 v18.8.0: Intent driven management services .
 Technical Specification 
 Technical Report 28.312 , 3GPP .
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §I ,
 §II-B ,
 §II-B ,
 §II-B ,
 §II-C ,
 §III ,
 §III ,
 §IV-E .
 [6] 
 ETSI (2024) 
 GS ZSM 016 v1.1.1: Intent-driven Closed Loops .
 GS 
 Technical Report ZSM 016 , ETSI .
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §I ,
 §III .
 [7] 
 H. Tran et al. (2024) 
 INA-Infra: Open and Extensible Infrastructure for Intent-driven Network Automation .
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09765 .
 Note: Accessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §I ,
 TABLE I ,
 §III .
 [8] 
 M. A. Habib, H. Zhou, P. E. Iturria-Rivera, M. Elsayed, M. Bavand, R. Gaigalas, Y. Ozcan, and M. Erol-Kantarci (2023) 
 Intent-driven Intelligent Control and Orchestration in O-RAN Via Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning .
 In IEEE 20th International Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc and Smart Systems (MASS) ,
 pp. 55–61 .
 External Links: Document 
 Cited by: §I ,
 §II-A ,
 TABLE I ,
 §III ,
 §III ,
 §III .
 [9] 
 T. Dinh et al. (2025) 
 Towards End-to-End Network Intent Management with LLMs .
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13589 .
 Note: Accessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §I ,
 TABLE I ,
 §III .
 [10] 
 X. Wu, J. Farooq, Y. Wang, and J. Chen (2025) 
 LLM-xApp: A Large Language Model Empowered Radio Resource Management xApp for 5G O-RAN .
 In NDSS Workshop on Security and Privacy of Next-Generation Networks (FutureG) ,
 Note: Accessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §I ,
 TABLE I ,
 §III .
 [11] 
 S. Niknam, A. Roy, H. S. Dhillon, S. Singh, R. Banerji, J. H. Reed, N. Saxena, and S. H. Yoon (2022) 
 Intelligent O-RAN for Beyond 5G and 6G Networks .
 IEEE Network 36 ( 3 ), pp. 2–9 .
 Cited by: §II-A .
 [12] 
 A. Banerjee, S. S. Mwanje, and G. Carle (2021) 
 An Intent-Driven Orchestration of Cognitive Autonomous Networks for RAN management .
 In International Conference on Network and Service Management (CNSM) ,
 pp. 380–384 .
 External Links: Document 
 Cited by: §II-B ,
 §II-B ,
 §II-D ,
 TABLE I ,
 §III ,
 §III ,
 §III .
 [13] 
 Anthropic (2024) 
 Introducing the Model Context Protocol .
 Note: Anthropic News [Online]Accessed: 2026-02-18 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §II-E .
 [14] 
 Anthropic (2025) 
 What is the Model Context Protocol (MCP)? .
 Note: Anthropic [Online]Accessed: 2026-02-18 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §II-E .
 [15] 
 X. Hou, Y. Zhao, S. Wang, and H. Wang (2025) 
 Model context protocol (mcp): landscape, security threats, and future research directions .
 External Links: 2503.23278 ,
 Link 
 Cited by: §II-E .
 [16] 
 K. Abbas, T. A. Khan, M. Afaq, and W.-C. Song (2020) 
 IBNSlicing: Intent-Based Network Slicing Framework for 5G Networks using Deep Learning .
 In Asia-Pacific Network Operations and Management Symposium ,
 pp. 19–24 .
 Cited by: TABLE I ,
 §III ,
 §III .
 [17] 
 K. Mehmood, H. V. Kalpanie Mendis, K. Kralevska, and P. E. Heegaard (2021) 
 Intent-based Network Management and Orchestration for Smart Distribution Grids .
 In 2021 28th International Conference on Telecommunications (ICT) ,
 pp. 1–6 .
 External Links: Document 
 Cited by: TABLE I ,
 §III ,
 §III ,
 §III .
 [18] 
 M. Xie, P. H. Gomes, J. Niemöller, and J. P. Waldemar (2022) 
 Intent-Driven Management for Multi-Vertical End-to-End Network Slicing Services .
 In IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps) ,
 pp. 1285–1291 .
 External Links: Document 
 Cited by: TABLE I ,
 §III ,
 §III ,
 §III ,
 §III .
 [19] 
 J. Mcnamara, D. Camps-Mur, M. Goodarzi, H. Frank, L. Chinchilla-Romero, F. Cañellas, A. Fernández-Fernández, and S. Yan (2023) 
 NLP Powered Intent Based Network Management for Private 5G Networks .
 IEEE Access 11 , pp. 36642–36657 .
 External Links: Document 
 Cited by: TABLE I ,
 §III ,
 §III ,
 §III ,
 §III .
 [20] 
 J. Zhang, H. Wei, D. Gao, N. Xia, D. Wang, S. Yan, and X. Liu (2023) 
 Intent-Driven RAN Slice Orchestration: A Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning Based Approach .
 In IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC Workshops) ,
 pp. 1–6 .
 External Links: Document 
 Cited by: TABLE I ,
 §III ,
 §III .
 [21] 
 C. V. Nahum, V. H. L. Lopes, R. M. Dreifuerst, P. Batista, I. Correa, K. V. Cardoso, A. Klautau, and R. W. Heath (2024) 
 Intent-Aware Radio Resource Scheduling in a RAN Slicing Scenario Using Reinforcement Learning .
 IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications 23 ( 3 ), pp. 2253–2267 .
 External Links: Document 
 Cited by: TABLE I ,
 §III ,
 §III .
 [22] 
 V. Gopal et al. (2024) 
 AdapShare: RL-Based Dynamic Spectrum Sharing for O-RAN .
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.16842 .
 Note: Accessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: TABLE I ,
 §III .
 [23] 
 L. Bonati et al. (2024) 
 PACIFISTA: Characterizing and Mitigating O-RAN Conflicts .
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04395 .
 Note: Accessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: TABLE I ,
 §III .
 [24] 
 S. Lee et al. (2025) 
 LLM-hRIC: LLM-empowered hierarchical RIC for O-RAN .
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18062 .
 Note: Accessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: TABLE I ,
 §III .
 [25] 
 J. De la Cruz et al. (2025) 
 RSLAQ: Robust SLA-driven RAN QoS with O-RAN .
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09187 .
 Note: Accessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: TABLE I ,
 §III .
 [26] 
 S. Parashar (2025) 
 Intent-Based APIs for Automated Network Provisioning and Lifecycle Control: A Comprehensive Framework .
 Journal of Computational Analysis and Applications (JoCAAA) 34 ( 12 ), pp. 29–37 .
 External Links: Document 
 Cited by: TABLE I ,
 §III .
 [27] 
 TM Forum (2024) 
 Intent Management API TMF921 v5.0.0 .
 Note: TM Forum [Online]Accessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §III ,
 §III .
 [28] 
 TM Forum (2022) 
 Intent in Autonomous Networks V1.3.0 .
 Technical Report 
 TM Forum .
 Cited by: §III .
 [29] 
 3GPP (2023) 
 Intent Driven Management .
 Note: 3GPP Technology Page [Online]Accessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §III ,
 §III .
 [30] 
 ETSI (2024) 
 Zero-touch network and Service Management (ZSM); Intent-driven autonomous networks; Generic aspects .
 Technical Report 
 European Telecommunications Standards Institute .
 Cited by: §III ,
 §III .
 [31] 
 ETSI (2024) 
 TS 103 985 v1.1.0: A1 interface Use Cases and Requirements .
 TS 
 Technical Report 103 985 , ETSI .
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §III ,
 §III .
 [32] 
 O-RAN Alliance (2025) 
 O-RAN Alliance releases 60 new or updated technical documents since March 2025 .
 Note: O-RAN Alliance News [Online]Accessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §III .
 [33] 
 ITU-R (2015) 
 IMT Vision – Framework and overall objectives of the future development of IMT for 2020 and beyond .
 Recommendation 
 Technical Report M.2083-0 , International Telecommunication Union .
 Cited by: §VI-A .
 [34] 
 3GPP (2018) 
 Study on Scenarios and Requirements for Next Generation Access Technologies .
 Technical Report (TR) 
 Technical Report 38.913 , 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) .
 Cited by: 3rd item .
 [35] 
 A. Dandoush, V. Kumarskandpriya, M. Uddin, and U. Khalil (2024) 
 Large language models meet network slicing management and orchestration .
 External Links: 2403.13721 ,
 Link 
 Cited by: §VI-A .
 [36] 
 J. Ip and K. Vongthongsri (2024) 
 DeepEval: The Open-Source LLM Evaluation Framework .
 Note: GitHub repositoryAccessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §VI-B6 .
 [37] 
 Y. Qin, S. Liang, Y. Ye, K. Zhu, L. Yan, Y. Lu, Y. Lin, X. Cong, X. Tang, B. Qian, S. Zhao, Z. Liu, and M. Sun (2024) 
 ToolLLM: Facilitating Large Language Models to Master 16000+ Real-world APIs .
 In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,
 Note: Accessed: 2026-02-12 
 External Links: Link 
 Cited by: §VI-B6 .
 Experimental support, please
 view the build logs 
 for errors. Generated by
 L
 A 
 T
 E 
 xml 
 .
 Instructions for reporting errors 
 We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
 support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
 methods listed below: 
 Click the "Report Issue" ( 
 ) button, located in the page header. 
 Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report. 
 Our team has already identified the following issues . We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
 may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
 should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
 all. 
 Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion , and welcome developer contributions . 
 We gratefully acknowledge support from
 our major funders ,
 member institutions , ,
 and all contributors.
 About 
 · 
 Help 
 · 
 Contact 
 · 
 Subscribe 
 · 
 Copyright 
 · 
 Privacy 
 · 
 Accessibility 
 · 
 Operational Status (opens in new tab) 
 Major funding support from 
