DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

1

ORION: Intent-Aware Orchestration in Open RAN
for SLA-Driven Network Management

arXiv:2603.03667v1 [cs.NI] 4 Mar 2026

Gabriela da Silva Machado, Gustavo Z. Bruno , Alexandre Huff , José Marcos Camara Brito , and
Cristiano B. Both

Abstract—The disaggregation of the Radio Access Network
(RAN) introduces unprecedented flexibility but significant operational complexity, necessitating automated management frameworks. However, current Open RAN (O-RAN) orchestration
relies on fragmented manual policies, lacking end-to-end intent
assurance from high-level requirements to low-level configurations. In this paper, we propose ORION, an O-RAN compliant
intent orchestration framework that integrates Large Language
Models (LLMs) via the Model Context Protocol (MCP) to translate natural language intents into enforceable network policies.
ORION leverages a hierarchical agent architecture, combining an
MCP-based Service Management and Orchestration (SMO) layer
for semantic translation with a Non-Real-Time RIC rApp and
Near-Real-Time RIC xApp for closed-loop enforcement. Extensive evaluations using GPT-5, Gemini 3 Pro, and Claude Opus
demonstrate a 100% policy generation success rate for highcapacity models, highlighting significant trade-offs in reasoning
efficiency. We show that ORION reduces provisioning complexity
by automating the complete intent lifecycle, from ingestion to E2level enforcement, paving the way for autonomous 6G networks.
Index Terms—O-RAN, Intent-Based Networking, Large Language Models, Service Management and Orchestration, Network
Slicing.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The Fifth Generation (5G) mobile communications ecosystem has embraced disaggregation and openness to unlock
flexible service delivery, yet these same properties amplify
the operational burden on Radio Access Network (RAN)
operators [1]. The Open Radio Access Network (O-RAN)
architecture formalizes this transition by splitting control
across the Service Management and Orchestration (SMO)
framework and the Non-Real-Time (Non-RT) and Near-RealTime (Near-RT) RAN Intelligent Controllers (RICs), each
exposing programmatic interfaces for policy-driven control.
In practice, operators must coordinate a growing catalog of
Non-real-time RIC applications (rApps) and Near-real-time
RIC applications (xApps) and reconcile the pace of software
updates with strict Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and
Service Level Objectives (SLOs). They must also maintain
end-to-end observability across disaggregated components [2].
Manuscript received April XX, 2025. The research leading to this paper
received support from the Program OpenRAN@Brasil. This work also
received support from the Commonwealth Cyber Initiative, an investment in
the advancement of cyber R&D, innovation, and workforce development.
Gustavo Zanatta Bruno and José Marcos Camara Brito are
with the National Telecommunications Institute (INATEL). E-mail:
gustavo.zanatta@posdoc.inatel.br, brito@inatel.br.
Gabriela da Silva Machado and Cristiano B. Both are with the University
of Vale do Rio dos Sinos (UNISINOS). E-mail: cbboth@unisinos.br.
Alexandre Huff is with the Federal Technological University of Paraná
(UFTPR). E-mail: alexandrehuff@utfpr.edu.br.

Intent-Based Network (IBN) has emerged to bridge highlevel business goals and low-level network actions by offering
formalism to capture desired outcomes and automating the
translation into enforceable policies [3], [4]. Telecom bodies such as 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) and
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) now
specify intent-driven management hooks for RAN automation.
Industry proposals extend IBN with data-driven and Large
Language Model (LLM)-based assistants [5], [6], [7]. However, current IBN efforts focus either on cloud-native infrastructure abstractions or on intent-to-policy translation detached
from O-RAN’s dual-controller pipeline, delivering limited
guarantees on SLA preservation and lacking an integrated
lifecycle that spans clarification, validation, deployment, and
continuous adaptation [8], [9], [10].
These gaps motivate our investigation of intent-aware orchestration tailored to O-RAN. We study how to couple LLMassisted interfaces with O-RAN-compliant control loops so
that operator intents become deployable, monitorable policies
without compromising latency, throughput, or reliability commitments. The research question guiding this work is: How
can O-RAN management be enabled using intents without
compromising network quality and SLA compliance?
This paper makes the following contributions:
• We introduce ORION, an intent-aware orchestration
pipeline that aligns LLM-assisted intent capture with the
SMO, Non-RT RIC, and Near-RT RIC roles, structuring slice-related requests through Common API Mobile
And Routing Access (CAMARA)’s NetworkSliceBooking
schema to ground translations in telecom semantics.
• We design validation and composition flows that span
SMO applications, rApps, and xApps, ensuring intents
progress through schema checks and policy generation
before enforcement via A1 Interface (A1) and E2 Interface (E2) interfaces, establishing the architectural foundation for Closed-Loop Assurance (CLA) loops.
• We implement a prototype combining Model Context
Protocol (MCP) services and O-RAN-compliant control
functions that operationalizes the provisioning and activation phases of the proposed pipeline.
• We provide a dataset of 100 natural language intents
mapped to standard telecom slice types (Enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB), Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency
Communications (URLLC), Massive Machine Type
Communications (mMTC)) and Quality of Service (QoS)
parameters to benchmark translation fidelity in O-RAN
contexts.
• We conduct a comprehensive evaluation analyzing the

DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

cost-performance trade-offs, policy creation success rates,
and tool-use reliability of six state-of-the-art LLMs. Additionally, we assess the resource overhead and end-toend latency of the proposed architecture, demonstrating
its viability for resource-constrained edge deployments.
We evaluate ORION by examining translation fidelity, orchestration overhead, and the correctness of generated policies
for representative slicing scenarios.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews O-RAN orchestration and intent-based networking foundations. Section III surveys prior art on intentdriven RAN management. Section IV details the ORION
architecture, and Section V summarizes the prototype. Section VI presents the evaluation and experimental analysis,
while Section VII concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUND
This section establishes the foundational concepts required
to understand the proposed intent-driven architecture. We first
review the O-RAN control loops and interfaces, followed by
the critical distinction between declarative intents and imperative policies. We then outline the standard intent lifecycle and
the management roles responsible for its execution. Finally,
we introduce the MCP, which underpins the LLM-based
translation engine.
A. O-RAN Architectural Elements
O-RAN disaggregates the 3GPP gNodeB (gNB) into virtualized Central Unit (CU) and Distributed Unit (DU) plus
Radio Unit (RU) [1]. Two intelligent controllers, the Non-RT
RIC (within the SMO) and the Near-RT RIC (edge), enable
policy- and Machine Learning (ML)-driven optimization at
complementary time scales (Non-RT: > 1 s; Near-RT: 10 ms–
1 s) [11]. The SMO hosts modular management functions and
rApps (service-level analytics and optimization), while the
Near-RT RIC hosts xApps that execute near-real-time control
loops over radio resources.
Data and control traverse distinct open interfaces: A1 conveys guidance from the Non-RT RIC to the Near-RT RIC; E2
streams telemetry upward and distributes fine-grained control
actions downward to CU/DU; and O1 Interface (O1) supports Fault, Configuration, Accounting, Performance, Security
(FCAPS) management between the SMO and RAN elements
[1]. This layering separates long-horizon optimization in the
Non-RT domain from sub-second adaptation in the Near-RT
edge domain.
The openness that enables innovation also creates coordination challenges: (i) heterogeneous vendor data models must be
normalized; (ii) timing alignment between A1 and E2 control
loops must avoid oscillations; and (iii) intent translation must
ensure consistency when multiple rApps/xApps manipulate
overlapping Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) [8]. These
issues motivate the structured abstractions described next.

2

(e.g., load balancing or QoS objectives) across scoped entities
(cells, slices, User Equipment (UE) groups) via A1-defined
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) policy types [1]. They
express “if/when → do” logic without explicitly declaring endstate semantics. Intents, by contrast, declare desired outcomes
or operational goals (the what), omitting the procedural how
[5]. A single intent may decompose into multiple policies
across domains (optimization, assurance, resource allocation)
[3].
Abstraction boundary: policies bind directly to enforcement
interfaces (A1 toward the Near-RT RIC, O1 for management
operations, and, indirectly, E2 control via xApps) [1]. In contrast, intents act as a contract specifying KPIs (e.g., “average
cell-edge throughput ≥ X Mbps within latency constraint Y”)
[5]. Translation engines map such KPI-oriented statements
into one or more concrete policy objects plus monitoring
queries. Policies are evaluated reactively on triggers; intents
are continuously assured, with fulfillment engines monitoring
KPIs against target states and adapting underlying policies
[12].
Challenges include conflict detection (e.g., two intents driving contradictory Physical Resource Block (PRB) allocation
goals), measurability (ensuring each intent has observable success metrics), and drift handling (environmental changes invalidating earlier translations) [3]. Effective frameworks therefore
(i) capture goals and constraints, (ii) validate feasibility against
current topology and resources, (iii) translate into minimal,
consistent policy sets, and (iv) maintain CLA adjustments to
preserve declared outcomes [5], [12].
C. Intent Lifecycle
The lifecycle comprises: Create (register goals, scope, constraints), Activate (begin fulfillment), Monitor/Assure (observe
KPIs, detect deviation), Modify (adjust goals or suspend state),
Suspend (temporarily halt fulfillment), and Terminate (cease
monitoring). Each state transition is auditable and can emit
events that feed higher-level orchestration.

1
Create

Activate /
Deploy

2

3
8
7

Modify

Monitor /
Assure

4
Terminate
Default Flow

5

Suspend

Alternatives Flows

B. Policies vs. Intents
In O-RAN, policies are structured rules: when events and
conditions hold, specified actions execute to steer performance

Fig. 1. Intent lifecycle states and transitions with default flow (1–6) and CLA
feedback loops (7–8).

DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

Fig. 1 illustrates these states. Solid arrows (1–6) depict the
nominal flow from creation through activation and assurance to
termination. Dashed arrows highlight the CLA feedback loops
essential for O-RAN: arrow 7 represents corrective actions
triggered when KPIs deviate during monitoring, while arrow 8
captures re-translation or rollback following modifications.
CLA evaluates whether observed state matches the declared
outcome; deviations trigger re-translation (e.g., updated A1
policies) or operator notification, per 3GPP TS 28.312 [5].
This adaptive cycle ensures continuous alignment with declared goals under dynamic network conditions.
D. Roles in Intent-Driven RAN
Within SMO-based handling, the RAN Management Intent
Owner (RMIO) formulates intents (goals, constraints, KPI
targets, reporting cadence), owns lifecycle authority (modify, suspend, terminate), and defines assurance requirements.
The RAN Management Intent Handler (RMIH) advertises
supported intent classes, interprets RMIO submissions, decomposes them into actionable policies/configurations (A1
guidance, O1 management actions), orchestrates deployment,
resolves alternative fulfillment strategies (optionally consulting
the RMIO), and performs continuous assurance.
Operationally, the RMIO queries capability advertisements,
submits a validated intent, and receives an identifier with a
reporting schedule. Subsequently, the RMIO is asynchronously
notified of assurance status or required decisions (e.g., selecting among alternative resource trade-offs). The RMIH
maintains a dependency graph mapping intents to generated
policies and underlying xApp/rApp actions, enabling targeted
updates rather than wholesale recomputation when only one
KPI threshold changes.
The RMIH manages conflicts across coexisting intents
(priority-based arbitration or multi-objective optimization) [3],
adapts policies upon KPI drift, and issues status/fulfillment
reports [12]. This separation clarifies accountability (ownership vs. operational realization) and supports scalable multitenant automation in O-RAN, while providing clear hooks for
auditing, rollback, and intent evolution.
Despite architectural openness, consistent and explainable
translation from high-level intents to coherent multi-interface
policies (A1, O1, E2), while assuring outcomes under dynamic
traffic, remains non-trivial. This motivates the related work and
the proposed architecture that follow.
E. Model Context Protocol
The MCP is an open standard protocol for connecting
Artificial Intelligence (AI) assistants to external data sources
and tools, enabling models to produce context-aware responses
[13]. MCP follows a client-server architecture where a host
(e.g., an LLM application) establishes a connection with a
server that provides access to external systems, databases, and
specialized workflows [14].
The architecture comprises an MCP Host, MCP Client, and
MCP Server. The Host manages the Client and provides the
execution environment. The Client acts as an intermediary,
initiating requests to the Server and retrieving descriptions of

3

available tools and capabilities. The Server executes operations
on external systems. When a Host needs to perform an action,
it queries the Server via the Client to discover tools, selects
the appropriate one, and requests execution. The Server then
performs the operation and returns the result [15].
III. R ELATED W ORK
This section surveys intent-driven management for
RAN/O-RAN. We first review the evolving standards
landscape that establishes foundational definitions and
operational roles for intent handling. Subsequently, we
analyze recent research proposals across five architectural
dimensions that dictate practical deployment: (i) intent
representation, concerning how declarative goals and
constraints are formally captured; (ii) translation and
interpretation, covering the algorithmic mechanisms used to
map high-level objectives into machine-executable policies;
(iii) lifecycle and assurance, reflecting the capabilities for
continuous monitoring, closed-loop validation, and conflict
resolution; (iv) network slicing scope, detailing how intents
govern the orchestration of dedicated resources; and (v)
O-RAN alignment, indicating native integration with standard
SMO and RIC control loops. Table I summarizes the surveyed
literature against these five evaluation dimensions.
Standards landscape. The treatment of intent has matured
across Standards Development Organizations (SDOs). TM
Forum (TMF)’s TMF921 Intent Management API (v5.0.0)
binds explicitly to the TMF Intent Ontology, clarifying validation, capabilities, and exchange of machine-tractable intent
objects [27], [28]. In 3GPP, TS 28.312 (Rel-18 v18.8.0)
formalizes quantifiable intents, feasibility and fulfillment reports, and priority/conflict semantics; it also details discovery
of handler capabilities and aligns SMO/Non-RT roles with
lifecycle hooks [5], [29]. ETSI Zero touch network and
Service Management (ZSM) provides the reference model
for owner/handler roles and closed-loop operations [30], and
ZSM 016 adds a three-level conflict taxonomy with concrete
detect-report-judge-fulfill interactions [6]. From the O-RAN
angle, ETSI TS 103 985 (PAS) captures O-RAN WG2 A1
policy/Enrichment Information (EI) jobs and status flows [31],
while Request for Comments (RFC) 9315 standardizes IBN
terminology and separates fulfillment from assurance [4].
Together, these specifications define the contract for intent handling but stop short of an end-to-end, O-RAN-native reference
instantiation.
Intent representation. Prior work spans natural-language
interfaces, structured templates, and standards-based models.
Natural-language inputs with operator-facing portals appear
in [19], [17], [8], often coupled to guided forms to constrain
ambiguity (e.g., specifying a desired KPI improvement like
“increase throughput by 10%” [8]). Template- or rule-oriented
forms are used in [12], [3], where operators describe goals in
predefined fields that map to policy rules. A standards-aligned
approach adopts the TMF intent model, technology-agnostic
goals with explicit semantics, as in [18], [21], which reduces
interpretation ambiguity and eases decomposition into policies.
Translation and interpretation. Mapping high-level goals
to concrete policies/configurations is handled via rule

DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

4

TABLE I
R ELATED WORK ON I NTENT FOR RAN/O-RAN: REPRESENTATION , TRANSLATION , LIFECYCLE / ASSURANCE , SLICING , AND O-RAN ALIGNMENT
Year
2020
2021
2021
2021
2022
2023
2023
2023
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024
2025
2025
2025
2025
2025
2026

[16]
[12]
[3]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[8]
[20]
[21]
[2]
[7]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[10]
[9]
[25]
[26]
This Work

Paper
Graph-based RAN slice orchestration
Rule-pipeline intent to KPI commands
End-to-end IBN (standardized model)
Intent-driven slice mgmt (power grid)
TMF-aligned intent for E2E slicing
NLP-powered private 5G management
Hierarchical DRL for O-RAN xApp orchestration
Intent-driven RAN slice orchestration (MARL)
Intent-aware RRS for RAN slicing (RL)
AI/ML-driven SMO framework in O-RAN
INA-Infra: open intent-driven slicing stack
AdapShare: RL-based intent spectrum sharing
PACIFISTA: O-RAN conflict characterization
LLM-hRIC: LLM-guided Non-RT + RL Near-RT
LLM-xApp: NL-to-slice translation at Near-RT
FEACI: translation quality scoring (RAN+Core)
RSLAQ: SLA-driven QoS with A1/E2 loops
Intent APIs for lifecycle control
E2E Intent Orchestration
Yes

Intent Rep.

pipelines, graph-based reasoning, or Natural Language Processing (NLP)/AI-assisted engines. [12] validates admissibility (KPI/control-parameter scope), classifies content, then
emits commands. Graph-based translators in [16], [20] consult
topology/resource/policy repositories to build intent–resource
graphs and generate domain-specific RAN policies. [19] separates an Intent Engine (NLP interface, Application Programming Interface (API) intent matching, interpretation to
API calls) from an AI Engine hosting ML models for lowlevel context, while TMF-aligned handling in [18] follows
capability-driven translation. Several works mention validation/translation steps without full detail [3]. Recently, LLMs
have been placed directly in the control loop: LLM-xApp
translates dynamic UE QoS intents into slice configurations
at Near-RT timescales [10]; LLM-hRIC organizes translation hierarchically with LLM-guided Non-RT guidance and
Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based Near-RT enforcement
[24]; Orange proposes FEACI to score translation quality
across RAN+5G Core (5GC) [9]; and INA-Infra demonstrates
an open O-RAN-based stack (Nephio+rApp+xApp) that operationalizes intent-to-slice flows [7]. Overall, a common pattern
is feasibility checking, capability matching, construction of
minimal consistent policy sets, and continuous feedback.
Lifecycle, assurance. Lifecycle operations (create, modify,
suspend, terminate) and handler interfaces appear in [18], and
Parashar proposes a framework for automated provisioning
and lifecycle control via intent-based APIs [26], while [17]
maintains CLA by monitoring performance and adapting policies. These notions align with ETSI ZSM’s owner/handler
roles and declarative outcomes [30], 3GPP TS 28.312’s intent
semantics and lifecycle hooks [5], and RFC 9315’s distinction between fulfillment and assurance with drift remediation
[4]. Standards have strengthened intent semantics and instrumentation: TMF921 v5.0.0 (Oct. 2024) binds to the TMF
Intent Ontology (TIO), clarifying validation and exchange
[27]; and recent updates to 3GPP TS 28.312 (Jul. 2025)

Partial

Translation

Lifecycle/Assurance

Slicing

O-RAN Align.

No

underscore this by specifying report subscription mechanisms
for SMO/Non-RT handlers [5], [29]. Research on runtime assurance and conflicts includes RSLAQ’s SLA→KPI mapping
with A1/E2 monitoring [25] and PACIFISTA’s rApp/xApp
profiling with graph reasoning to predict conflict severity and
Key Performance Metric (KPM) impact [23]. Many prototypes
still emphasize ingestion/initial fulfillment over long-horizon
assurance, conflict reconciliation, and rollback.
Alignment with O-RAN. Only a subset explicitly instantiates O-RAN’s Non-RT/Near-RT split with open interfaces.
[3] places long-term policy/ML in the Non-RT RIC and
real-time control in the Near-RT RIC via A1/O1, while [8]
uses hierarchical Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) with
Non-RT rApps issuing goals over A1 to Near-RT xApps. [19]
integrates an intelligence layer adjacent to RAN, borrowing
O-RAN concepts without a native end-to-end loop. Newer
materials underscore native treatment of intent and conflicts
in Non-RT/Near-RT loops, ETSI TS 103 985 captures A1
policy/EI jobs and status [31], and the O-RAN Alliance
published an SMO Intent-driven Management TR (v5.0) and
an A1 Policy Conflict Mitigation Study (v1.00) [32]. RLbased, O-RAN-consistent enforcement pipelines also appear
(AdapShare; AI/ML-driven SMO) [22], [2].
Slicing scope and use cases. Objectives range from
KPI/control-parameter tuning [12] to performance steering
via rApp/xApp orchestration [3], [8], with slicing-focused
frameworks optimizing SLA satisfaction and resource allocation across RAN and sometimes 5GC [20], [16], [18], [21].
Private 5G management with intent-driven slice provisioning
is explored in [19], while [17] maps intents to slice instances
in a power-grid automation context.
Across the literature, there is convergence on: (i)
declarative goal capture with explicit KPIs and scope;
(ii) repository-backed translation (capabilities, topology,
policies) to derive consistent policies; and (iii) multitimescale control where Non-RT guidance informs

DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

IV. P ROPOSED A RCHITECTURE : ORION
This section presents ORION, an intent-aware orchestration
pipeline for O-RAN that bridges natural-language intents and
deployable RAN policies. ORION couples an LLM-assisted
MCP client/server with O-RAN-compliant control functions
(Non-RT/SMO and Near-RT RIC) and reuses the CAMARA
NetworkSliceBooking API schema as a canonical template to
structure slice-related intents.
A. Design Objectives
ORION pursues five core objectives. Automation with SLAawareness ensures intents translate into machine-validated
specifications that preserve latency, throughput, and reliability
KPIs. Modularity decouples intent assistance, interpretation,
composition, and policy handling, enabling each block to
evolve independently. Role alignment maps responsibilities to
SMO/RIC, adopts RMIO/RMIH semantics, and reuses open
API schemas such as CAMARA. Strict O-RAN compliance
integrates the Non-RT RIC for A1 policy distribution and the
Near-RT RIC/xApps for E2 enforcement. Finally, extensibility
supports cases beyond slicing (e.g., energy saving) by swapping schemas and tool adapters without pipeline redesign.
B. High-Level Architecture Overview
Figure 2 depicts ORION’s blocks spanning the
SMO/Non-RT and Near-RT layers. The Intent Management
implements an MCP Client that receives the intent requests
from an operator or higher-layer system, invokes an LLM
with domain tools provided by the MCP Server, which
provides the LLM with context from external telecom
APIs. For slicing, it exposes an API consumer aligned to
CAMARA NetworkSliceBooking. Within the SMO, the MCP
Client tracks tools aligned with the lifecycle to execute the
request and ensure intents are well-formed and structured
before creating a policy. The Orion rApp (Orion rApp)
converts structured intents into concrete policy templates

Intent
Assistance
Interface

Camara
API

User

Intent
MCP Server

MCP Client

Interpretation
Scheme
smoApp

Non-RT
RIC

Intent
Management
smoApp

Intent request

ORION
rApp

Slice Info

R1

SMO
A1/Policy

Near-RT
RIC

Slice Policy

ORION
xApp

Slice Info

Near-RT enforcement. Yet no work delivers a complete
ingestion→translation→enforcement→CLA pipeline that is
natively O-RAN-embedded (A1/O1/E2), standards-aligned
(TMF & 3GPP models), and provides first-class conflict
management (priority, reconciliation, degradation); even
the most advanced proposals (e.g., RSLAQ’s SLA-to-KPI
loop or LLM-xApp’s translator) cover only slices of the
pipeline, and standards (ZSM 016, TS 28.312) specify roles
and messages but not an end-to-end reference instantiation.
The proposed architecture addresses this gap with an
ingestion-to-enforcement pipeline that exposes capability
discovery, aligns lifecycle management with standards, and
provides the architectural mechanisms to sustain CLA over
O-RAN interfaces. We rate this work as partially fulfilling
Lifecycle/Assurance (i.e., ) because, while the architecture
specifies the full loop including conflict remediation, the
current prototype operationalizes the critical path from
ingestion to E2 enforcement, leaving long-term CLA as
future work.

5

E2

E2 Node

Fig. 2. ORION high-level architecture spanning SMO/Non-RT and Near-RT
RIC: the MCP Client/Server structure intents using CAMARA’s NetworkSliceBooking schema; the Orion rApp composes policies, and the Orion xApp
enforces them via A1/E2.

and parameters, performing domain calculations to derive
SLA targets (e.g., mapping user requirements to throughput
and latency budgets). Finally, the Orion xApp (Orion xApp)
operates with A1/E2 interaction: the Non-RT RIC publishes
policies via A1, and the Orion xApp performs the final
resource translation, calculating exact PRB quotas based
on real-time cell capacity, and enforces control through E2
toward gNBs (DU/CU).
C. Component Details
The MCP Client and Server jointly realize the intent assistance plane. The client orchestrates the LLM workflow:
it recognizes incoming intent requests, forwards them to the
server, invokes the appropriate tool, and returns the structured
outcome to the SMO. It maintains conversation state and
applies guardrails that promote deterministic mappings from
natural language to schema fields. The server exposes tool
endpoints and domain context to the LLM. For slicing, the
server supplies a translator aligned with CAMARA’s NetworkSliceBooking API1 . This translator accepts an intent payload,
builds a compliant JSON POST and returns a structured result.
The design grounds the LLM in telecom constraints and
decouples credentials and API logic from the model prompt.
ORION adopts the NetworkSliceBooking resource model (e.g.,
slice profile, QoS requirements, area of service, duration) as a
canonical skeleton for slice intents, enabling vendor-agnostic
translation and simplifying validation and auditing.
1 https://github.com/camaraproject/NetworkSliceBooking

DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

Within the SMO/Non-RT domain, the MCP Host identifies
the tool and provides the arguments so the MCP Client
triggers the MCP Server tool, which performs the request
to CAMARA’s NetworkSliceBooking API for schema checks
for completeness (mandatory fields), consistency (ranges and
units), and feasibility (capability match). Ambiguities are
surfaced to the MCP Client to request clarifications, ensuring
that only admissible, complete intents progress to composition.
The Orion rApp and Orion xApp execute the translation
and enforcement workflow. Given a validated structured intent,
the Orion rApp computes control parameters and maps them
into policy templates; for slicing, this includes allocating
throughput/latency/reliability budgets, selecting scheduler and
QoS classes, and defining E2 monitoring metrics. The Non-RT
RIC publishes policies via A1, and the Orion xApp enforces
them through E2 towards gNBs (DU/CU). The Orion xApp
monitors KPMs and drives CLA updates by requesting recomputation or rollback when deviations are detected.
D. End-to-End Intent Workflow
The end-to-end lifecycle covers six phases. Ingestion: an
operator issues a slice intent and the MCP Client initializes the
LLM session. Translation: the LLM calls the MCP Server tool,
which structures the request per CAMARA NetworkSliceBooking and returns JSON. Validation: the MCP Client and
MCP Server verify correctness and feasibility and may request
clarifications. Composition: the Orion rApp turns the validated
intent into policy templates and parameter values. Deployment:
the Non-RT RIC publishes policies via A1 and the Orion xApp
enforces them through E2 toward gNBs. Monitoring and
adaptation: KPIs trigger recomputation, incremental updates,
or rollback when deviations appear.
E. Extensibility and Standards Alignment
Roles map to RMIO/RMIH: the operator or service assumes
RMIO, while the MCP Client and Orion rApp act as RMIH.
ORION aligns with O-RAN by placing intent management and
composition in the Non-RT/SMO domain and using A1/E2
for control, consistent with 3GPP intent definitions [5]. By
treating CAMARA APIs as interchangeable schema backends,
the same pattern generalizes to other intents (energy saving,
load balancing) by swapping the tool and policy templates
without altering the core workflow.
Example trace.: ”Provision a URLLC slice in area X with
1 ms latency and 99.999% reliability for 2 hours.” An operator
issues the request, the MCP Client opens the LLM session, and
the MCP Server tool produces NetworkSliceBooking JSON
with latencyTarget=1 ms, reliability=99.999%,
area=X, and duration=2 h. The MCP Client validates
the payload and forwards it to the Orion rApp, which derives
scheduler priorities and SLA constraints before emitting an
A1 policy. The Orion xApp computes the necessary PRB
reservations to meet these constraints, enforces the policy
through E2, and monitors URLLC KPIs; if latency exceeds 1
ms, the Orion rApp tightens scheduling deadlines or triggers
rollback to a previous stable configuration.

6

V. I MPLEMENTATION AND P ROTOTYPE
To validate the feasibility and performance of the proposed
intent-driven architecture, we developed a comprehensive
Proof of Concept (PoC). While the architecture (Section IV)
encompasses the full intent lifecycle, this operational prototype
focuses on the Creation and Activation phases. It validates the
critical path of translating unstructured intent into enforceable
policies, which is the prerequisite for any subsequent closedloop assurance. This prototype realizes an end-to-end workflow, from natural language ingestion to varying RAN resource
allocation, by integrating a Generative AI-based orchestration agent with standard O-RAN components. The system is
deployed as a suite of containerized microservices, bridging
the semantic gap between high-level user requirements and
low-level E2 Service Model (E2SM) configurations. The key
components of the prototype are detailed below.
A. Frontend (Streamlit)
A web-based user interface developed using the Streamlit
framework allows users to input natural language intents. The
interface renders the conversation history, maintaining distinct
bubbles for user interaction, while persisting state across
sessions. Communication with the MCP Client is handled
via asynchronous Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) POST
requests targeting the /intent endpoint.
B. Service Management and Orchestration
The SMO implementation leverages the MCP to orchestrate
the intent lifecycle. The MCP Client is built with FastAPI
and integrates multiple LLM providers via a unified interface.
It manages the system prompt, injected as a shimmed user
message to enforce strict JSON output formats, and establishes
a Server-Sent Events (SSE) connection to the MCP Server to
enable real-time tool execution. The MCP Server is developed
using the Python mcp library to provide a standardized interface for network functions. It hosts the create_session
tool, which acts as a proxy by receiving Pydantic-validated
arguments and forwarding them to the underlying Slice API.
C. Large Language Model
We integrated state-of-the-art LLMs (including OpenAI
GPT-5, Google Gemini 3 Pro, and Anthropic Claude Opus) to
function as the cognitive engine. The LLM operates under a
strict system prompt that prohibits the use of minimum values
unless specified. The interaction creates a two-step process:
first, the model selects a tool based on the user’s natural
language intent; second, after tool execution, the model is
prompted again to classify the traffic (e.g., eMBB, URLLC)
based on the session parameters.
D. CAMARA Mock API
A mock server implementing the CAMARA Network Slice
Booking API was developed to strategies for exposing network
resources. The core endpoint, POST /sessions, accepts
booking requests adhering to OpenAPI 3.0.3 schemas. To

DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

7

Near-RT RIC

SMO

SMO

Frontend

MCP Client

LLM

1
Enters Intent
(e.g., "Reserve high
bandwidth slice")

Non-RT RIC

MCP Server

Camara API

Orion rApp

2
Prompt with Tools
Definition
Select Tool:
3
network_slice_booking

5
POST /sessions
(Check Feasibility)

Execute Tool Request 4

Return Execution Result
Feed Tool Result
8
back to LLM
Generate JSON with
Slice Parameter 9

7

200 OK (Session ID &
QoS Profile)
6

Sends Structured Intent (POST /generate-policy)

10
Flow continues to A1
Mediator (Near-RT RIC)

Fig. 3. Non-RT RIC Intent Execution Flow.

ensure stability, a lightweight admission control mechanism
is engaged using an in-memory storage dictionary; requests
are rejected with a 429 TOO_MANY_REQUESTS status if the
active session count exceeds a predefined threshold.
E. Orion rApp (Non-RT RIC)
The Orion rApp exposes a POST /generate-policy
endpoint to receive structured intent data. Its primary role is
to act as an intent translation engine, converting the high-level
operational requirements into precise SLA objectives. Instead
of computing low-level resource quotas (which depend on
dynamic RAN conditions), the Orion rApp derives the target
QoS metrics, such as maximum throughput, latency budgets,
and packet error rates, required to satisfy the user’s intent.
The final output is an A1 Policy JSON payload containing the slice ID, scope, and these specific SLO objectives.
Crucially, the policy also includes the slice_type (e.g.,
URLLC, eMBB). This semantic tag allows the Orion xApp to
select appropriate scheduling disciplines (e.g., Earliest Deadline First for URLLC vs. Proportional Fair for eMBB) that
raw QoS integers alone cannot fully imply. An example of
such a generated policy payload is shown in Listing 1.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

Listing 1. Example A1 Policy Instance generated by the OrApp.
{
"ric_id": "ric4",
"policy_id": "48782",
"service_id": "intentSlice",
"policy_data": {
"scope": {
"sliceId": {
"sst": 1,
"sd": "456DEF",
"plmnId": {
"mcc": "724",
"mnc": "11" },
"nci": 1 },
"sliceType": "mMTC" },
"sliceSlaObjectives": {
"maxDlThptPerUe": 50000,
"maxUlThptPerUe": 25000,
"maxDlThptPerSlice": 300000000,
"maxUlThptPerSlice": 150000000 } },
"policytype_id": 10002 }

F. SMO/Non-RT RIC Workflow
The interaction flow within the SMO and Non-RT RIC is
depicted in Figure 3. This intent translation process follows
a sequence initiated by the user’s intent declaration. The
workflow commences when the user inputs a natural language
intent via the Streamlit frontend (Step 1). The MCP Client
captures this input and constructs a prompt for the LLM,
including the tool definitions (Step 2). Based on the prompt,
the LLM identifies the need for network capabilities, selects
the network_slice_booking tool, and returns the arguments for the request (Step 3). The MCP Client then formally
requests the execution of this tool from the MCP Server
(Step 4). To validate the feasibility of the request, the MCP
Server queries the CAMARA API (Step 5), which performs
admission control and allocates resources. Upon success, the
CAMARA API returns a Session ID and the confirmed QoS
parameters (Step 6). This result is relayed back to the MCP
Client (Step 7), which feeds the structured output back into
the LLM context (Step 8). The LLM then synthesizes the
final configuration payload in JSON format, identifying the
slice type (Step 9). Finally, the MCP Client transmits this
structured intent to the Orion rApp within the Non-RT RIC
for policy generation (Step 10).

G. Orion xApp
The Orion xApp is a C++ based application deployed on the
Near-RT RIC platform. Acting as the A1 Interface termination
point, it receives JSON-based policies from the Non-RT RIC
via the A1 Mediator. Upon receiving a policy, the Orion xApp
is responsible for the dynamic translation of SLA objectives
into concrete resource allocations.
To determine the resource quota, the Orion xApp first
retrieves the current configuration of the target E2 Node (e.g.,
bandwidth, numerology, and Multiple Input Multiple Output
(MIMO) layers) to determine the Maximum Cell Capacity.

DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

8

Near-RT RIC
A1 Mediator

xApp Orion

RAN

E2 Manager

A1_POLICY_REQ 1
(RMR)

2

JSON Policy: sliceId
(PLMN, SST, SD, NCI)
sliceSlaObjectives

GET E2 Node List

Parse A1
Policy

Node List

E2 Termination

E2 Sim

3

4

Generate E2SM-RC Control Header
5
Encode E2AP PDU
6
RIC_CONTROL_REQ (RMR)

7

RICcontrolRequest
(SCTP)

8

RICcontrolAck
RIC_CONTROL_ACK (RMR)

10

Decode e
Process
9

11

A1_POLICY_RESP
(RMR)
12

Fig. 4. Sequence diagram of the control loop.

It then calculates the required PRB percentage to meet the
requested throughput using the formula:


Requested Throughput
× 100
(1)
PRB% =
Max Cell Capacity
The core functionality then maps this calculated percentage
into E2SM-RC structures. These control messages are encoded using Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1) Packed
Encoding Rules (PER) for transmission over E2 Application
Protocol (E2AP), enforcing the slice boundaries directly at the
scheduler level.
H. E2 Simulator (E2Sim) (e2sim-rc)
The e2sim-rc is an extension of the O-RAN Software
Community (OSC) E2Sim, modified to support E2SM, emulating a gNB capable of advanced resource control. During
the initialization phase, it performs the E2 Setup procedure,
advertising support for E2SM-RC Control Style 2 (Radio
Resource Allocation) and Action ID 6 (Slice-level PRB quota).
The simulator is designed to decode incoming RIC Control
Requests and apply PRB partitioning logic. Additionally, it
implements a capacity validation mechanism acting as a resource guard to reject any control requests that would exceed
the total available PRB capacity of the cell, ensuring network
stability.
I. Near-RT RIC Workflow
The interaction between the Orion xApp and the RAN is
illustrated in the sequence diagram (Figure 4). The process
follows a control loop triggered by the arrival of a new policy.
The cycle begins when the A1 Mediator pushes a policy to
the Orion xApp via the RIC Message Router (RMR) interface
(Step 1). The Orion xApp parses the JSON payload to extract
the target slice identifier and SLA objectives (Step 2). To
determine enforcement targets, the Orion xApp queries the E2
Manager (E2Mgr) (Step 3), which returns a list of connected
E2 Nodes and their inventory (Step 4). The Orion xApp’s

translation engine converts the parsed SLA parameters into an
E2SM-RC Control Header and Control Message, specifying
the Control Style (Type 2), Action ID (6), and RAN Parameters for PRB Policy Ratios (Step 5). These structures are
encapsulated into an E2AP RICcontrolRequest Protocol
Data Unit (PDU) and encoded into binary format (Step 6).
The encoded message is sent to the E2 Termination via
RMR (Step 7), which forwards it to the specific E2 Node over
Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) (Step 8). Upon
receipt, the e2sim-rc decodes the payload and processes the
request (Step 9), validating that the new allocation respects
the node’s capacity before updating the scheduler. If successful, the simulator generates a RICcontrolAcknowledge
message sent back to the E2 Termination (Step 10). This
acknowledgement is routed to the Orion xApp (Step 11),
confirming the configuration. Finally, the Orion xApp reports
the operation status to the Non-RT RIC via an A1 Policy
Response (Step 12), closing the control loop.
VI. E VALUATION
This section evaluates the ORION framework’s efficacy in
automating intent-driven network orchestration.2 Our primary
objectives are to quantify: (1) the reliability of LLM-driven
agents in translating high-level intents into valid A1 policies;
(2) the cost-performance trade-offs between competing foundational model architectures; (3) the classification accuracy of
3GPP slice-type inference from unstructured intents; and (4)
the latency and resource overhead imposed by the MCP-based
orchestration architecture on the O-RAN infrastructure.
A. Experimental Setup
To validate translation fidelity and orchestration performance, we utilize a curated evaluation dataset comprising 100
natural language intents. The dataset distribution is weighted
2 Analysis scripts, datasets, and figures are publicly available at: https://gi
thub.com/zanattabruno/analysis-orion

DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

on average, compared to 154–775 for Anthropic and OpenAI
models. This disparity stems from Gemini’s verbose chain-ofthought outputs, which include explicit reasoning steps in the
response.
15270

15090

15226

104

Tokens

2418

2394

Input Tokens
Output Tokens

103

27306

26349

18548

1512
775

200
154

102

Claude

.5
.5
ro
sh
no
Opus 4 de Sonnet 4Gemini 3 Fla Gemini 3 P GPT-5 Na
Clau

GPT-5

Fig. 5. Token consumption per intent across LLM providers (log scale). Solid
bars represent input tokens; hatched bars represent output tokens. Error bars
indicate standard deviation.

2) Reasoning Token Allocation: Models that expose reasoning tokens exhibit markedly different computational strategies
(Fig. 6). Gemini models allocate 21–23% of their total token
budget to explicit reasoning, compared to only 2.4–4.9% for
GPT-5 variants. This architectural difference suggests that
Gemini employs more deliberate chain-of-thought processing
for intent-to-policy translation, while GPT-5 models rely on
more direct inference patterns. Anthropic models do not expose reasoning tokens in their API response, precluding direct
comparison of their internal deliberation overhead.
30000
25000
20000

Tokens

to reflect the connection density inherent to 5G deployment
scenarios [33]:
• eMBB (20 samples): High-throughput scenarios such as
video journalism, cloud gaming, and 4K media streaming,
prioritizing downstream rates (e.g., 100–500 Mbps) and
moderate latency.
• URLLC (20 samples): Critical, low-latency applications
including autonomous robotics, remote surgery, and industrial automation, targeting strict packet delay budgets
(1–7 ms) and high availability.
• mMTC (60 samples): Massive connectivity use cases
like smart city sensors, environmental monitoring, and
utility metering. This category is oversampled to represent the high heterogeneity and massive scale of IoT
endpoints (target density of 106 devices/km2 [34]), where
intents must handle diverse duty cycles and reporting
intervals.
Each entry in the dataset pairs a realistic unstructured
operator prompt (e.g., “Provision a slice for drone traffic
management...”) with its structured ground truth, including the
specific slice type, required throughput, latency constraints,
and device capacity. This dataset serves as the input workload
for the SMO layer to quantify the LLM’s ability to correctly
extract and map intents to the CAMARA-compliant NetworkSliceBooking schema.
The dataset was created based on the intents used by [35]
and the network slice types defined by 3GPP. This data
was structured into a prompt, along with ORION’s operating
characteristics, to generate different intent types using GPT-5
in a supervised manner.
The experimental testbed was hosted on a Kubernetes cluster deployed on a VMware-virtualized host running Ubuntu
24.04.2 LTS. The virtualized infrastructure was provisioned
with 12 vCPUs (Intel Xeon X5660 @ 2.80 GHz) and 23 GiB
of RAM, representing resource-constrained legacy edge infrastructure. This environment hosted the full ORION stack,
including the SMO framework, Non-RT and Near-RT RIC
instances, and the RAN simulation components.

9

15000

Input
Output
Reasoning

29282

22780

28761

22298

18748
15424

10000
5000

B. LLM Cost-Performance Analysis
To evaluate the operational viability of LLM-based intent
translation in the SMO layer, we benchmarked six state-of-theart models from three providers: Claude Opus 4.5 and Sonnet
4.5 (Anthropic), Gemini 3 Flash and Pro (Google), and GPT-5
and GPT-5 Nano (OpenAI). Each model processed identical
O-RAN network slice intents spanning eMBB, URLLC, and
mMTC use cases, with the SMO orchestrating tool calls to
translate natural language requests into A1 policies. Table II
summarizes the key performance metrics.
1) Token Consumption Patterns: Input token consumption
varies significantly across models, ranging from 15,090 (Gemini 3 Flash) to 27,306 (GPT-5),a 1.8× difference (Fig. 5). This
variance reflects differing tokenization strategies and context
window utilization. OpenAI models exhibit consistently higher
input consumption due to their tokenizer encoding MCP tool
schemas less efficiently. Output tokens show even greater
variance: Gemini models produce 2,394–2,418 output tokens

0
.5
sh
Pro T-5 Nano
4.5
Opus 4
onnet Gemini 3 Fla Gemini 3
GP
Claude Claude S

GPT-5

Fig. 6. Token allocation breakdown showing input, output, and reasoning
components. Anthropic models report zero reasoning tokens as this metric is
not exposed via their API.

3) Policy Creation Success: Policy creation success rate
measures the model’s ability to correctly invoke the MCP
tool and generate a valid A1 policy (Fig. 7). Four models
achieved ≥97% success: Claude Opus 4.5 (100%), Gemini 3
Pro (100%), GPT-5 (100%), and GPT-5 Nano (97%). Gemini
3 Flash achieved 85.7% due to occasional malformed tool
invocations. Claude Sonnet 4.5 exhibited only 17% success,
consistently failing to invoke the MCP tool despite correctly
understanding the intent semantics,a limitation in the model’s
function-calling capability rather than intent comprehension.
This finding highlights that raw language understanding does

DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

10

TABLE II
LLM P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON FOR I NTENT P ROCESSING
N
100
100
77
78
100
100

Input Tokens
18,766 ± 9,616
15,270 ± 9,679
15,090 ± 8,308
15,226 ± 8,173
26,349 ± 14,797
27,306 ± 15,138

Output Tokens
204 ± 115
154 ± 16
2,418 ± 2,028
2,394 ± 2,787
1,512 ± 381
775 ± 226

not guarantee reliable tool orchestration, a critical consideration for agentic SMO deployments.

GPT-5

100.0%

GPT-5 Nano

97.0%

Gemini 3 Pro

100.0%

Gemini 3 Flash

85.7%

Claude Sonnet 4.5

17.0%

Claude Opus 4.5

100.0%

0

20

40

60

80

Success Rate (%)

100

Fig. 7. Policy creation success rate by model. Success requires correct MCP
tool invocation and valid A1 policy generation.

4) Cost-Performance Tradeoff: Our analysis reveals a 156×
cost differential between the most economical (Gemini 3 Flash
at 0.19 cents/intent) and most expensive (Claude Opus 4.5 at
29.68 cents/intent) models (Fig. 8). Critically, cost does not
correlate with success rate: Gemini 3 Flash, the cheapest
option, achieves 85.7% success, while the second-cheapest
GPT-5 Nano (0.49 cents/intent) achieves 97%. For production
deployments, this finding has significant operational implications. An O-RAN system processing 10,000 daily intents
would incur annual API costs ranging from $694 (Gemini
3 Flash) to $108,332 (Claude Opus 4.5). Given comparable success rates, cost-optimized model selection can reduce
operational expenses by two orders of magnitude without
sacrificing reliability.

Cost per Intent (cents)

7.601

4.811

3.100

100

0.486
0.186

10 1

Claude

Cost (cents/intent)
29.68
4.81
0.19
3.10
0.49
7.60

Success (%)
100.0
17.0
85.7
100.0
97.0
100.0

5) Slice-Type Classification Accuracy: Beyond policy creation success, we evaluate the semantic correctness of the
generated policies by measuring how accurately each model
classifies the 3GPP slice type (eMBB, URLLC, or mMTC)
implied by the natural language intent. Classification accuracy
is computed deterministically: a prediction is correct if and
only if the extracted slice type matches the ground-truth
label assigned by domain experts. As illustrated in Fig. 9,
three performance tiers emerge. Claude Opus 4.5 leads with
99% accuracy across 101 intents, misclassifying only a single
instance, while GPT-5 follows closely at 96%. In the midrange, GPT-5 Nano achieves 90% and Gemini 3 Pro 77%. The
lower tier comprises Gemini 3 Flash (66%) and Claude Sonnet
4.5 (13%). Notably, these accuracy figures are tightly coupled
to the policy creation success rates reported in Table II:
Claude Sonnet 4.5’s 13% accuracy directly mirrors its 17%
tool-invocation success; the model fails to call the MCP tool
for 83% of intents, yielding no slice-type prediction at all.
Similarly, Gemini 3 Flash achieves a 100% classification rate
among the intents for which it produces a prediction (66 out of
66 correct), but its 66% prediction rate limits overall accuracy.
100

99.0
90.0

80

96.0

77.0
66.0

60
40
20

13.0

0
.5
sh
no
Pro
4.5
Opus 4
onnet Gemini 3 Fla Gemini 3 GPT-5 Na
d
Clau e Claude S

GPT-5

Model

29.325

101

Reasoning (%)
N/A
N/A
23.1
21.0
4.9
2.4

Accuracy (%)

Model
Claude Opus 4.5
Claude Sonnet 4.5
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3 Pro
GPT-5 Nano
GPT-5

.5
.5
ro
sh
no
Opus 4 de Sonnet 4Gemini 3 Fla Gemini 3 P GPT-5 Na
Clau

GPT-5

Fig. 8. API cost per intent across LLM providers (log scale). Error bars
represent standard deviation across intents.

Fig. 9. Slice-type classification accuracy by model. Only intents for which
the model produced a slice-type prediction are evaluated.

Among models that reliably produce predictions (≥97%
prediction rate), accuracy spans 90–99%, indicating that once
the LLM successfully invokes the tool pipeline, the slice-type
inference is highly reliable. This finding confirms that the
primary bottleneck for intent-to-policy fidelity lies in the MCP
tool orchestration layer rather than in the model’s semantic
understanding of network slice requirements.
6) MCP Tool-Use Quality Assessment: While the preceding
metrics capture whether a model invokes the tool and what
slice type it selects, they do not assess the fine-grained
correctness of the generated tool arguments,i.e., whether every

DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

11

parameter in the NetworkSliceBooking schema was populated faithfully and no extraneous values were fabricated.
To address this gap, we employ the DeepEval framework’s
MCPUseMetric [36], [37], which provides an automated,
schema-aware evaluation of MCP tool-call quality. Each test
case is constructed from the same 100-intent dataset: the
prompt context comprises the system prompt (encoding eight
field-population rules, e.g., “all fields stay null unless the
user specifies them”) concatenated with the user intent, while
the actual_output is the model’s raw tool-call response.
An MCPServer descriptor,capturing the available tools, resources, and prompts exposed by the Orion MCP server via
SSE,provides the tool schema against which correctness is
judged. No expected output is supplied; instead, a judge model
(Claude Opus 4.5, temperature = 0) scores each response on a
continuous 0–1 scale by assessing tool selection, argument
structure, and value fidelity.
Fig. 10 presents the score distribution across all 600 evaluated test cases. Two distinct performance clusters emerge.
Claude Opus 4.5 and GPT-5 Nano form a high-quality cluster,
with probability densities concentrated in the upper quartile
and mean scores of 0.85 and 0.82, respectively. GPT-5 exhibits
a similar high-performance distribution but with a slightly
lower mean of 0.75 due to a systematic pattern: the model
consistently populates the upStreamDelayBudget field
when the user mentions a generic “packet delay budget”
without specifying directionality, which the evaluator penalizes
as a Rule 8 violation (fabricating values for unspecified
fields). In contrast, the Gemini models occupy a low-score
cluster marked by broad, lower-bound-skewed distributions:
Gemini 3 Pro achieves a mean of 0.36, while Gemini 3 Flash
scores only 0.28. Claude Sonnet 4.5 falls between the two
clusters, displaying a high-variance distribution with a mean
of 0.55.
1.0

Score

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Claude

.5
.5
ro
sh
no
Opus 4 de Sonnet 4 Gemini 3 Fla Gemini 3 P GPT-5 Na
Clau

conventions and explains scores concentrated in the 0.20–0.45
range. Second, Claude Sonnet 4.5 exhibits an over-cautious
refusal pattern: in 16% of test cases, it declines to invoke any
tool and instead solicits follow-up information for fields that
the system prompt explicitly designates as nullable,effectively
treating optional schema fields as mandatory requirements.
Third, as noted above, GPT-5 demonstrates ambiguous field
placement, where a generic user reference to “delay budget”
is mapped to both upstream and downstream parameters;
while this interpretation is semantically defensible, it conflicts
with the strict null-unless-specified instruction and results in
consistent score deductions (typically from 0.9–0.95 to 0.55–
0.65 on affected cases). These findings underscore that MCP
tool-use quality is influenced not only by a model’s language
comprehension but also by its adherence to schema constraints
and its tool-calling serialization fidelity,factors that are largely
opaque to conventional accuracy metrics.
C. Resource Consumption Analysis
We assessed the computational overhead of the proposed
intent orchestration framework using the Prometheus monitoring stack to scrape CPU and memory metrics from the target
Kubernetes namespaces. The evaluation captured the steadystate performance of the O-RAN platforms (Non-RT RIC,
Near-RT RIC) and the developed MCP Server/Client, alongside the specific intent-handling components (Orion rApp,
Orion xApp) and the E2Sim. As illustrated in Fig. 11, the
resource distribution reveals a stark contrast between the baseline infrastructure platforms and the lightweight orchestration
logic implemented in this work.
The quantitative results confirm the efficiency of our approach. The Non-RT RIC remains the most resource-intensive
component, consuming an average of 76.4 ± 3.4 m CPU and
≈ 7.1 GiB of memory due to its comprehensive microservice
suite, followed by the Near-RT RIC at 37.1 ± 4.6 m CPU
and 1.1 GiB memory. In comparison, the custom intent applications impose negligible overhead: the Orion rApp and
Orion xApp consume only 1.5 ± 0.3 m and 0.4 ± 0.0 m CPU
respectively, with memory footprints under 40 MiB, while the
E2Sim accounts for the remaining ≈ 25.6 m overhead. With
a total system-wide draw of approximately 141 millicores and
8.5 GiB RAM, the solution proves viable for deployment on
resource-constrained edge servers.

GPT-5

Fig. 10. DeepEval MCPUseMetric score distribution by model. Violin plots
show kernel density estimates.

Failure analysis reveals three distinct root causes. First, both
Gemini models systematically generate multiple redundant
create_session invocations for a single user request (2–
6 duplicate calls per intent), and their tool-call arguments
are serialized in a truncated format (<... 3 items at
Max depth ...>), preventing the evaluator from verifying parameter correctness. This behavior likely stems from
incompatibilities in the models’ function-calling serialization

D. End-to-End Latency Analysis
The end-to-end processing pipeline was analyzed to quantify the latency introduced by each architectural layer, from the
user’s intent submission at the Frontend to the enforcement at
the E2 Node. Fig. 12 illustrates the mean processing times for
each stage. The total latency is dominated by the SMO layer,
specifically the stochastic processing within the LLM components (OpenAI GPT-5). The translation of natural language
intents into policy artifacts (SMO Intent→Policy) and the
subsequent tool execution (SMO MCP Tool Execution) exhibit
significant duration compared to the downstream components,
contributing the majority of the total end-to-end delay.

DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

12

102

76.4m
37.1m

E2 Node Slice
Registration
E2 Node Control
Processing
xApp Wait for E2 ACK

101
1.5m

100

0.4m
0.2m

Memory (MiB)

104

7114Mi
1112Mi

103
195Mi

102

40Mi
9Mi

101

Frontend
SMO
Non-RT RIC
Near-RT RIC
E2 Node

0.7ms
2.5ms

xApp Policy Control
xApp Full Policy
Processing
A1 Mediator
Processing
rApp PUT to Non-RT
RIC
rApp Policy
Translation
MCP Server
Session Request
SMO Policy Creation
SMO MCP Tool
Execution
SMO LLM Tool Start

169.6ms
6.4ms
2.4ms
111.9ms
112.4ms
15070.3ms
5508.4ms
47.3ms
3435.0ms

Sim

9025.4ms

Frontend Connection
Frontend E2E
Response

2.3ms
8431.4ms

E2

No
n-R
T

RT
Ne
ar-

p
rAp

pp
xA

Layer
0.6ms

SMO Intent Policy
2Mi

S Clie
MCerve nt
P r

Processing Stage

CPU (millicores)

25.3m

100

101

102

103

104

Mean Processing Time (ms)

Fig. 11. CPU (millicores) and Memory (MiB) usage by namespace (Mean
± Std Dev).

In contrast to the SMO layer, the Near-RT RIC and E2
Node components demonstrate highly deterministic behavior
with minimal variance. The xApp processing time (xApp
Full Policy Processing) and the A1 Mediator latency remain
consistently low, validating the platform’s suitability for nearreal-time control loops. The variance observed in the upper
layers, indicated by the error bars in Fig. 12, is inherent to the
generative nature of the LLM and network conditions during
the initial Representational State Transfer (REST) interactions.
Conversely, the strict timing requirements of the O-RAN
specification are met by the lower layers, where the control
loop operations (xApp Policy→Control and E2 Node Control
Processing) execute within the sub-second/millisecond range
required for effective RAN optimization.
VII. C ONCLUSION
We have presented ORION, an intent-driven orchestration
framework that bridges the gap between high-level operator objectives and low-level O-RAN policy enforcement.
By integrating LLM-powered agents within the SMO and
standardizing intent translation via the CAMARA NetworkSliceBooking schema, we demonstrated a robust pipeline for
automating network slice provisioning across eMBB, URLLC,
and mMTC domains. Our evaluation confirms that while stateof-the-art foundational models like Claude Opus 4.5 and GPT5 achieve near-perfect translation fidelity (>99% success),
cost-optimized models such as GPT-5 Nano offer a viable
operational alternative, delivering 97% success at a fraction

Fig. 12. Mean processing time breakdown across O-RAN architectural layers.
The diagram highlights the latency disparity between the compute-intensive
intent processing in the SMO (purple) and the highly optimized, deterministic
control operations in the Near-RT RIC (blue) and E2 Node (orange). Error
bars indicate standard deviation.

of the inference cost. Crucially, the architecture imposes
negligible resource overhead on the RIC infrastructure, with
the semantic processing latency confined to the SMO layer,
ensuring that the critical Near-RT control loops remain deterministic. ORION thus establishes a foundational reference
for cognitive O-RAN management, proving that generative AI
can be effectively harnessed to reduce operational complexity
without compromising carrier-grade performance standards.
Future work will extend the evaluation to local LLM
deployments, assessing trade-offs between inference latency,
privacy compliance, and reasoning capability compared to
cloud-hosted models. Additionally, we plan to fully instrument
the closed-loop assurance mechanism, enabling the system to
autonomously trigger intent modification and rollback based
on real-time RAN telemetry.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially funded by the project XGMAFCCT-2024-5-1-1 supported by xGMobile - EMBRAPII Inatel Competence Center on 5G and 6G Networks, with
financial resources from the PPI IoT/Manufatura 4.0 / the
MCTI grant number 052/2023, signed with EMBRAPII, and,
partially funded by FAPESP Project PORVIR-5G (Grants No.
2020/05182-3 and 2025/01970-0).

DRAFT - DO NOT DISTRIBUTE

R EFERENCES
[1] M. Polese et al., “Understanding Open RAN: Architecture, Interfaces,
and Research Challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1312–1346, 2023.
[2] F. Habibi et al., “Towards an AI/ML-driven SMO Framework in ORAN,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.05092, 2024, accessed: 2026-02-12.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.05092
[3] L. Velasco et al., “End-to-End Intent-Based Networking,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 106–112, 2021.
[4] A. Clemm et al., “RFC 9315: Intent-based networking-concepts and
definitions,” 2022.
[5] 3GPP, “TS 28.312 v18.8.0: Intent driven management services,”
3GPP, Technical Specification 28.312, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi ts/128300 128399/128312/18.08.00 6
0/ts 128312v180800p.pdf
[6] ETSI, “GS ZSM 016 v1.1.1: Intent-driven Closed Loops,” ETSI, GS
ZSM 016, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi g
s/ZSM/001 099/016/01.01.01 60/gs ZSM016v010101p.pdf
[7] H. Tran et al., “INA-Infra: Open and Extensible Infrastructure for
Intent-driven Network Automation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09765,
2024, accessed: 2026-02-12. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2410.09765
[8] M. A. Habib et al., “Intent-driven Intelligent Control and Orchestration
in O-RAN Via Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning,” in IEEE 20th
International Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc and Smart Systems (MASS),
2023, pp. 55–61.
[9] T. Dinh et al., “Towards End-to-End Network Intent Management with
LLMs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13589, 2025, accessed: 2026-02-12.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.13589
[10] X. Wu et al., “LLM-xApp: A Large Language Model Empowered
Radio Resource Management xApp for 5G O-RAN,” in NDSS
Workshop on Security and Privacy of Next-Generation Networks
(FutureG), 2025, accessed: 2026-02-12. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/llm-xapp-a-large-language-m
odel-empowered-radio-resource-management-xapp-for-5g-o-ran/
[11] S. Niknam et al., “Intelligent O-RAN for Beyond 5G and 6G Networks,”
IEEE Network, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 2–9, 2022.
[12] A. Banerjee et al., “An Intent-Driven Orchestration of Cognitive Autonomous Networks for RAN management,” in International Conference
on Network and Service Management (CNSM), 2021, pp. 380–384.
[13] Anthropic, “Introducing the Model Context Protocol,” Anthropic
News [Online], 2024, accessed: 2026-02-18. [Online]. Available:
https://www.anthropic.com/news/model-context-protocol
[14] ——, “What is the Model Context Protocol (MCP)?” Anthropic
[Online], 2025, accessed: 2026-02-18. [Online]. Available: https:
//modelcontextprotocol.io/docs
[15] X. Hou et al., “Model context protocol (mcp): Landscape, security
threats, and future research directions,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.23278
[16] K. Abbas et al., “IBNSlicing: Intent-Based Network Slicing Framework
for 5G Networks using Deep Learning,” in Asia-Pacific Network Operations and Management Symposium, 2020, pp. 19–24.
[17] K. Mehmood et al., “Intent-based Network Management and Orchestration for Smart Distribution Grids,” in 2021 28th International Conference on Telecommunications (ICT), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[18] M. Xie et al., “Intent-Driven Management for Multi-Vertical End-to-End
Network Slicing Services,” in IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps),
2022, pp. 1285–1291.
[19] J. Mcnamara et al., “NLP Powered Intent Based Network Management
for Private 5G Networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 36 642–36 657,
2023.
[20] J. Zhang et al., “Intent-Driven RAN Slice Orchestration: A Multi-Agent
Deep Reinforcement Learning Based Approach,” in IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC Workshops),
2023, pp. 1–6.
[21] C. V. Nahum et al., “Intent-Aware Radio Resource Scheduling in a RAN
Slicing Scenario Using Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 2253–2267, 2024.
[22] V. Gopal et al., “AdapShare: RL-Based Dynamic Spectrum Sharing
for O-RAN,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.16842, 2024, accessed:
2026-02-12. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.16842
[23] L. Bonati et al., “PACIFISTA: Characterizing and Mitigating ORAN Conflicts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04395, 2024, accessed:
2026-02-12. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.04395

13

[24] S. Lee et al., “LLM-hRIC: LLM-empowered hierarchical RIC for ORAN,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18062, 2025, accessed: 2026-02-12.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.18062
[25] J. De la Cruz et al., “RSLAQ: Robust SLA-driven RAN QoS with ORAN,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09187, 2025, accessed: 2026-02-12.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.09187
[26] S. Parashar, “Intent-Based APIs for Automated Network Provisioning
and Lifecycle Control: A Comprehensive Framework,” Journal of Computational Analysis and Applications (JoCAAA), vol. 34, no. 12, pp.
29–37, 2025.
[27] TM Forum, “Intent Management API TMF921 v5.0.0,” TM Forum
[Online], 2024, accessed: 2026-02-12. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.tmforum.org/oda/open-apis/directory/intent-management-api-T
MF921/v5.0.0
[28] ——, “Intent in Autonomous Networks V1.3.0,” TM Forum, Technical
Report, 2022.
[29] 3GPP, “Intent Driven Management,” 3GPP Technology Page [Online],
2023, accessed: 2026-02-12. [Online]. Available: https://www.3gpp.org
/technologies/intent
[30] ETSI, “Zero-touch network and Service Management (ZSM); Intentdriven autonomous networks; Generic aspects,” European Telecommunications Standards Institute, Technical Report, 2024.
[31] ETSI, “TS 103 985 v1.1.0: A1 interface Use Cases and Requirements,”
ETSI, TS 103 985, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.etsi.org/deliv
er/etsi ts/103900 103999/103985/01.01.00 60/ts 103985v010100p.pdf
[32] O-RAN Alliance, “O-RAN Alliance releases 60 new or updated
technical documents since March 2025,” O-RAN Alliance News
[Online], 2025, accessed: 2026-02-12. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.o-ran.org/blog/o-ran-alliance-releases-60-new-or-updated-techn
ical-documents-since-march-2025
[33] ITU-R, “IMT Vision – Framework and overall objectives of the future
development of IMT for 2020 and beyond,” International Telecommunication Union, Recommendation M.2083-0, September 2015.
[34] 3GPP, “Study on Scenarios and Requirements for Next Generation
Access Technologies,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical Report (TR) 38.913, 2018.
[35] A. Dandoush et al., “Large language models meet network slicing
management and orchestration,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2403.13721
[36] J. Ip and K. Vongthongsri, “DeepEval: The Open-Source LLM
Evaluation Framework,” GitHub repository, 2024, accessed: 2026-0212. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/confident-ai/deepeval
[37] Y. Qin et al., “ToolLLM: Facilitating Large Language Models to Master
16000+ Real-world APIs,” in The Twelfth International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2024, accessed: 2026-02-12. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=V3K91s1J2O

